President Barack Obama, in his final State of the Union address, argued the U.S. has made significant progress on economic and national-security issues and offered an optimistic vision for the future that stands in contrast to the mood of many Americans.

Mr. Obama's address Tuesday night hit a series of familiar Democratic themes. He backed labor unions and said it was Wall Street, not immigrants and low-income Americans, that precipitated the economic crisis. But a major theme of the president's speech was a robust defense of his leadership on security issues and America's standing in the world. On those and other issues, Mr. Obama repudiated the rhetoric from Republicans on the 2016 campaign trail.

"The United States of America is the most powerful nation on Earth -- period," Mr. Obama said. "When it comes to every important international issue, people of the world do not look to Beijing or Moscow to lead -- they call us."

His speech reflected a president with diminishing time to advance a policy agenda, who instead is challenging Americans to embrace his vision for the country's future as he begins to make the case for electing a successor who would fulfill it.

"Anyone claiming that America's economy is in decline is peddling fiction," Mr. Obama said, poking again at his GOP critics. "What is true -- and the reason that a lot of Americans feel anxious -- is that the economy has been changing in profound ways."

But, he said, "The future we want -- opportunity and security for our families; a rising standard of living and a sustainable, peaceful planet for our kids -- all that is within our reach."

In the formal GOP response, South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley said that if a Republican were elected president, "taxes would be lower for working families, and we'd put the brakes on runaway spending and debt."

The president's optimistic speech came amid continued economic anxiety and Americans' heightened concerns about terrorism threats at home and growing unrest overseas.

Those concerns have been stoked by recent Islamic State-inspired attacks, as well as a suicide bombing Tuesday in Istanbul by a member of the group. Mr. Obama's speech also came just hours after Iran detained two small Navy boats and was holding 10 American crew members Tuesday in the Persian Gulf, and it followed a nuclear test by North Korea last week.

Republicans, before the speech, had called on Mr. Obama to use it to ease the country's fears by outlining a detailed strategy for combating Islamic State.

"Americans are so anxious right now about their security, about what's going on around the world," House Speaker Paul Ryan (R., Wis.) said Tuesday, noting the attack in Istanbul.

Some 70% of Americans believe the country is on the wrong track, according to a December Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll. The poll also found 51% of Americans disapprove of the job Mr. Obama is doing, while 43% approve.

Pushing back against some of his critics running for the GOP presidential nomination, Mr. Obama said the U.S. approach to threats overseas "needs to be more than tough talk or calls to carpet-bomb civilians."

"That may work as a TV sound bite, but it doesn't pass muster on the world stage," he said.

Without naming him, he criticized Republican front-runner Donald Trump's call for a temporary ban on Muslims in the U.S., and he suggested that was leading to an unwelcoming tone overall.

"When politicians insult Muslims, when a mosque is vandalized, or a kid bullied, that doesn't make us safer," Mr. Obama said "That's not telling it like it is. It's just wrong. It diminishes us in the eyes of the world. It makes it harder to achieve our goals. And it betrays who we are as a country."

On the epidemic of heroin and opioid addiction, which has emerged as an issue in the 2016 campaign, Mr. Obama urged action but noted "that because it's an election season, expectations for what we'll achieve this year are low."

The president also nodded to the election season at the start of his address, quipping that he would be shaking hands after his speech and could offer some advice on retail politicking in Iowa.

Mr. Obama called on Congress to pass several of his priorities: changes to the criminal-justice system, a new trade agreement with Asia and legislation lifting the longtime U.S. embargo on Cuba. Those policies have bipartisan support, but it isn't clear that Congress would pass them this year.

He also challenged lawmakers to vote on a new authorization for the use of military force against Islamic State, which has languished in Congress and is unlikely to advance this year.

Yet, the crux of Mr. Obama's speech was a challenge to Americans to address four issues -- the economy, technology, national security and politics -- that he believes are critical to the country's future.

Seeking to address anxiety over the economy, Mr. Obama called on Americans to coalesce around a set of prescriptions largely supported by his Democratic Party, including raising the federal minimum wage. And he made the case that the U.S. is in the midst of a historic economic transition driven by technology.

Changing politics in Washington was one of Mr. Obama's top priorities when he entered the White House in 2009, and he said he was sorry that would likely be unfulfilled.

"It's one of the few regrets of my presidency -- that the rancor and suspicion between the parties has gotten worse instead of better," Mr. Obama said.

Mr. Obama said the U.S. has had foreign-policy successes in using diplomatic outreach over military power, pointing to the Iran nuclear deal and the restoration of U.S. relations with Cuba. He also highlighted the U.S. role in ending the Ebola outbreak in Africa.

But Mr. Obama is likely to leave office without managing to end the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and his tenure has seen soured U.S. relations with Russia, an increasingly assertive China and a worsening conflict in Syria.

Republicans have been pressing Mr. Obama to more aggressively confront Iran, which has conducted two ballistic missile tests since the nuclear deal was reached last July. The House scheduled votes on new Iran sanctions for Wednesday. The White House has said Mr. Obama would veto the bill.

"The House will not sit back and wait for the president," House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R., Calif.) said Tuesday.

In his speech, Mr. Obama stopped short of suggesting Islamic State is an existential threat to the U.S., a designation his aides said he believes would elevate the group.

"Both al Qaeda and now ISIL pose a direct threat to our people, because in today's world, even a handful of terrorists who place no value on human life, including their own, can do a lot of damage," Mr. Obama said. "But they do not threaten our national existence."
