Iceland's government collapsed on Monday, days after its prime minister called for early elections amid popular anger over a financial crisis that has gutted the economy.

Prime Minister Geir Haarde said he and his cabinet would resign immediately. The move came after his Independence Party failed to come to terms with the Social Democrats, its main partner in Iceland's coalition government. On Monday afternoon, Mr. Haarde presented his resignation to Iceland's president.

Mr. Haarde was working to form a new government, his spokesman said, but Social Democrat leaders were demanding a fresh face. "The government's actions in the last weeks and months were not swift enough," Foreign Minister Ingibjorg Solrun Gisladottir, the leader of the Social Democrats, said on Monday, according to Agence France-Presse.

It is far from clear who will run Iceland until elections scheduled for May. Ms. Gisladottir proposed a fellow Social Democrat, Johanna Sigurdardottir, but Mr. Haarde's spokesman said the Independence Party -- which has a plurality of seats in parliament -- is determined not to hand over the prime minister's office.

That could open the door for the Independence Party's second-in-command, Thorgerdur Katrin Gunnarsdottir, currently education minister. Iceland's president, who holds a largely ceremonial post, has authority to designate a person responsible for forming a government.

Iceland becomes the second European nation -- after Belgium -- to lose its government in the global economic crisis. Iceland may be the world's hardest hit: Last fall, three big banks, or virtually the entire banking system, collapsed, and the island's currency went into free fall.

The currency and banking crises have caused a swift reversal of fortune for Icelanders, per capita once one of the world's wealthiest people. Today, inflation and unemployment are soaring, debt is mounting and the banking sector that provided jobs and fueled a consumption boom has vanished.

Anger at Iceland's leaders has been palpable for months. Since the fall, raucous demonstrations in front of the parliament building have drawn crowds of thousands. Protesters have pelted the building with eggs and rolls of toilet paper, and displayed effigies of Mr. Haarde.

Until last week, Mr. Haarde was defiant, saying Iceland -- which has accepted a $2.1 billion bailout from the International Monetary Fund -- couldn't afford political chaos as it tries to rebuild its economy.

But on Friday, he said his doctors had discovered a tumor of the esophagus, and that he would call for early elections in May and stand down as the party's chief.

Leaders of the protests said that wasn't enough. Demonstrations continued over the weekend. By Monday, the coalition had broken and Mr. Haarde faced open criticism from his partners.

At the root of Iceland's troubles was an outsize banking system, which grew wildly overseas and built up foreign liabilities many times the size of Iceland's economic output. When the credit crunch struck, the banks faced difficulty making payments, and Iceland's central bank didn't have the foreign currency needed to bail them out.
