Egypt's opposition groups lined up behind a moderate leader comfortable on the world stage as their best chance to oust President Hosni Mubarak Sunday, while the nation's military closed ranks with the government leadership but allowed protests to continue raging in the streets.

The moves continued to sharpen the country's clash over whether Mr. Mubarak would resign. Events here present difficult choices for the U.S., which has been attempting to push for both the stability that the military offers and the sweeping political changes demanded by the opposition. There was no indication that the two sides would meet or hold discussions.

State television showed footage of Mr. Mubarak with his newly appointed vice president, former intelligence chief Omar Suleiman, meeting Egypt's top army commanders Sunday. The images appeared to be a bid to show that control of the armed forces was still in the hands of Mr. Mubarak and his regime.

Fragmented opposition groups, including the powerful Muslim Brotherhood, put aside sometimes strident differences to unify behind Mohamed ElBaradei, a Nobel peace laureate who often tangled with U.S. officials when he led the United Nations agency inspecting Iran's nuclear program. His entry in Egyptian politics is more recent. He came to Cairo last week only after the protest movement had gathered steam on its own.

Egypt's opposition groups have had a checkered past, with ideological divides and personal animosities sapping them against the might of the Mubarak regime. For now, their solidarity appears to be holding. Mr. ElBaradei's endorsement by the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt's largest and best-organized opposition force, amounted to a historic display of unity between the country's secular and Islamist opposition forces.

The umbrella organization that organized the protests formed a steering committee on Sunday under Mr. ElBaradei to pressure the regime for more political concessions, according to senior Brotherhood leaders.

Mr. ElBaradei said in televised remarks that he looked forward to working with the military to help establish order and forge Egypt's new political future. In an interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation, he said: "The first step is [Mubarak] has to go. . .The second step is we have to have a government of national salvation in coordination with the army. The third step is the army has that horrible task of ensuring security." He warned the U.S. that its failure to disavow the current government was causing it to "lose credibility by the day."

Public acknowledgment of the crucial role the military would play in any transition appeared to be an attempt by Mr. ElBaradei to win over a key pillar of the regime. Since a military-led coup seized power in 1952, the military has wielded considerable power, but in recent decades has kept a relatively low political profile.

The military on Sunday dramatically increased its control over security and political affairs. The army assumed control of the Ministry of the Interior, which oversees the country's internal security forces, loathed by many Egyptians for their brutality. Top army officials, including the defense minister, made appearances around the capital Sunday, meeting with troops and shaking hands with people gathered for demonstrations.

Despite the public displays of power, major question marks surrounded the Mubarak regime. It was unclear how unified the top leadership was; how deeply divisions ran within the military hierarchy; and the extent of cooperation between the military and the police force.

Mr. ElBaradei made his first appearance in the city's central Tahrir Square on Sunday evening, where tens of thousands of protesters massed. The Interior Ministry's headquarters just a few blocks away was the site a day earlier of violent clashes between protesters and what appeared to be the last vestiges of internal security forces left on the country's streets. The military appeared to come to the protesters' aid, sending four armored personnel carriers to face down police.

While U.S. officials cautiously distanced themselves from Mr. Mubarak and U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called for transition to a "real democracy," the Egyptian military still came in for praise. "They are acting professionally," said Capt. John Kirby, a spokesman for Adm. Michael Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. "They are supporting the institutions of government and that is the proper role of the military."

The military has enjoyed broad respect among Egyptians, and appears to have gone to great lengths to avoid antagonizing citizens since deploying in the streets. But it showed no clear signs of reaching out to the opposition leadership. Military factories control significant chunks of the nation's economy, giving its leaders a vested interest in controlling the pace and extent of any political reforms.

Egypt's armed forces are the 12th largest in the world, according to the International Institute for Security Studies, and receive $1.3 billion in annual U.S. aid. One dramatic display of military might Sunday afternoon came when two F-16 jets flew over the Nile and the center of the capital.

Still, signs of disorder -- including widespread outbreaks of looting and reports of mass prison breaks from at least five different detention facilities since Friday -- threaten to erode the military's standing if it doesn't impose order. The army has yet to take firm control of the streets in the absence of the police, leaving many Egyptians worried and wondering why.

Security issues led the U.S. State department to organize emergency charters to help U.S. citizens who want to evacuate, beginning Monday. Sketchy reports have said more than 100 people have been killed during protests since Friday.

Throughout the capital, looting was a growing problem. As night fell Sunday, Cairo residents, armed with steel pipes and two-by-fours, organized neighborhood watch groups to fend off roving bands.

Many opposition leaders and analysts accused the military of allowing the chaos as part of a larger strategy to discredit popular protests.

Others believe that the military is incapable of restoring order or unwilling to jeopardize its popular standing by taking on the potentially unpopular role of a police force. State television announced that regular police forces would return to the streets Monday, but wouldn't deploy in the city's central Tahrir Square, apparently to avoid friction with protesters.