For a moment here Friday, it was the chief executive of Apple Inc. vs. the president of the United States.

Speaking just before Barack Obama at a conference on computer security, the iPhone maker's Tim Cook gave perhaps one of the most impassioned defenses of digital privacy from a corporate executive -- in this case the CEO of the world's most valuable company.

It was a pointed welcome for Mr. Obama, and a reminder that technology giants remain distrustful of government efforts to collect their users' data.

"If those of us in positions of responsibility fail to do everything in our power to protect the right of privacy, we risk something far more valuable than money," Mr. Cook said. "We risk our way of life."

Mr. Cook's remarks reflect the serious challenge Washington faces as it grapples with another problem of the digital era: cybersecurity. The government is trying to push private firms to share more data about the computer threats they face.

On Friday, Mr. Obama signed an executive order meant to make it easier for companies to do so -- such as quicker security clearances for some executives.

"This has to be a shared mission," Mr. Obama said. "Government cannot do this alone. The fact is, the private sector can't do it alone either."

On its face, protecting companies from hackers would seem to have nothing to do with spying by the National Security Agency, which has become a bit of a curse word in Silicon Valley following the leaks from former NSA contractor Edward Snowden. But the U.S. intelligence community is in the sometimes awkward position of helping defend America's most critical computer networks while also using hackers' tools to spy on others, including -- as the NSA revelations showed -- Americans.

As a result, for some executives, working with the government on blocking hackers is the same as working with the agencies that try to keep tabs on their customers and users.

Mr. Obama nodded toward that issue, but didn't back down from his defense of three-letter agencies.

"People rightly ask what safeguards we have against government intruding" on the privacy of citizens, Mr. Obama said. "It's hard."

Apple's Mr. Cook has been in a tangle with Washington since his company in September unveiled new encryption tools that in some cases make it very difficult for law enforcement to collect evidence from iPhones. In a short speech, he alluded to such absolute privacy protections that leave people free to "practice their religion, express their opinion or love who they choose." (The Apple CEO recently announced that he is gay.)

The privacy concerns at times overshadowed a primary goal of the summit, which was meant to prod the government and business leaders to share more information with each other about potential hacks.

During two panels of executives in the morning, multiple CEOs implored the government to share more information about threats or classified intelligence that could prevent a future breach.

"The government needs to aggressively share with the private sector in an appropriate manner the indicators of an attack," said American Express Co. CEO Kenneth Chenault.

Anthony Earley Jr., CEO of utility company PG&E Corp., said: "This work cannot be adversarial. We have enough adversaries out there."

But the issue of the NSA loomed large at Stanford University, the host of the conference.

Attendees went so far as to set up locked wireless networks with mysterious -- though presumably untruthful -- names, such as "FBI Surveillance Van" and "NSA Surveillance Van."
