Terrorists struck a European capital for the second time in four months, killing dozens here Tuesday in bombings plotted under the noses of authorities just days after a prime suspect in last year's carnage in Paris was captured.

Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attacks at the Brussels airport and on a subway train, starkly demonstrating the ability of the extremist network to direct or inspire deadly assaults in Europe, even as it suffers heavy setbacks from U.S.-led military strikes in its heartlands of Syria and Iraq.

Belgian officials said they were -- once again -- conducting house searches countrywide in the hunt for one suspect. One raid in Brussels turned up an explosive device containing nails, along with an Islamic State flag and chemical products, the federal prosecutor's office said.

Authorities had warned Islamic State could try to retaliate after the capture here Friday of an alleged Islamic State operative suspected of direct involvement in the Nov. 13 attacks on Paris.

But despite the warning, additional raids and a heavy police and army presence sent to guard transport hubs and tourist areas in Brussels, more bombs went off.

At least 11 people were killed at Brussels Airport and about 100 injured after two men blew themselves up in the check-in area around 8 a.m. local time, officials said. According to a person briefed on the attack, police also exchanged fire with a man firing a Kalashnikov.

The terror attacks were the most deadly in Belgian history.

"It was apocalypse," said Samir Derrouich, an airport worker who was standing about 30 yards away from one blast, with windows shattering and ceiling tiles crashing to the ground.

Mariama Toure Kindon, 33-year-old barista at an airport Starbucks, said she heard a small blast and immediately thought it was a terror attack.

"I ran in the opposite direction to the exit door and a minute later the second blast happened, near the Brussels Airlines counter, and I was hit by all the glass debris," she said. "Everything was covered in dust and smoke, people were crying. It was horrific."

She had her right hand cut by the glass falling from the hall's glass wall and was hit by something heavy on the back. She managed to exit the airport and stayed for a while on the road access to the airport.

"I got scared and I moved away from the cars, I thought there could be car bombs or more," she said. Police officers took her to a doctor who stitched her hand. She was then evacuated home, having left "my purse, everything, even my car," at the airport.

About an hour later, a rush-hour explosion in a subway car at the Maelbeek station, close to European Union offices, killed at least 20 and injured about 130.

There were scant details available about the identities of the victims of Tuesday's attacks, although U.S. officials said at least nine Americans were injured. The State Department late Tuesday issued a travel alert for all of Europe, urging U.S. citizens to consider the risks of traveling there in the aftermath of the attacks.

Brussels, which was locked down for four days in November after one of the Paris suspects fled back to his hometown, fell eerily quiet again as public transport was halted for hours and the government advised people not to leave their homes.

That suspect, a French citizen named Salah Abdeslam, was arrested with an associate Friday after an intensive manhunt. He has a court appearance set for Thursday to decide on his continued detention, his lawyer said.

Mr. Abdeslam was charged with committing "terrorist murders" and participating in a terrorist organization. His lawyer acknowledges he was present in Paris on the night of the attacks and says he is cooperating with investigators.

A U.S. official said the attacks appeared to be an attempt by Islamic State operatives to demonstrate their ability to rapidly retaliate in the wake of that arrest. Other officials said it was possible that terrorists, perhaps a cell directly linked to Mr. Abdeslam, accelerated an existing plan once it became public that he was cooperating with authorities.

If that is the case, their success will again raise questions about the ability of the hard-pressed Belgian authorities to manage a crisis in their midst.

Despite a well-publicized manhunt, Mr. Abdeslam was four months on the lam and was caught near his home in Brussels's district of Molenbeek, harbored apparently by accomplices who weren't under police surveillance.

The Paris attacks, which killed 130 people, made Brussels a focus of European concerns over Islamic radicalism. Investigators have said the attacks were planned in Belgium and Belgians took part in them. At least a dozen suspects, all originating from the Brussels region, have been arrested in relation to the attacks.

Islamic State claimed the Brussels attacks via its official Amaq news agency, saying it had targeted Belgium for participating in the U.S.-led coalition fighting the group in Syria and Iraq. Belgian authorities said the claim was still being verified.

Police released a photo of three men suspected of having carried out the first attack, pushing luggage carts inside the airport. Belgian broadcasters reported that the three had arrived by taxi and apparently hid the bombs in their luggage.

Federal prosecutor Frederic Van Leeuw said two were believed to have blown themselves up and the third, wearing a light-colored jacket and a hat, had apparently escaped and was being "actively sought."

Another explosive device that had been planted at the airport didn't go off, and was later detonated by the bomb squad, according to Arnaud Feist, CEO of the Brussels Airport.

Mr. Van Leeuw said house searches were being conducted throughout the country and witnesses questioned. The country's terror threat level was raised from three to four, the maximum level.

Claudiu Rusu, a 25-year-old Brussels student on a class trip to Portugal, said he was in the departure hall when the explosions happened. He had blood on his face, which he said came from flying glass.

"There were dead and injured people everywhere," he said while pushing his suitcase down a blocked-off motor way shortly after the explosions.

Marc Decramer, head of a hospital in Leuven where some of the airport victims were being treated, said that at least one of the bombs apparently contained glass and nails. "Most of the injured are heavily wounded; fractures, burns, and also deep lacerations," he said.

Security was tightened at airports and train stations across Europe. The Brussels Airport was to remain closed until at least Thursday, Mr. Feist said.

In a televised address to the nation, King Philippe called the attacks "cowardly and odious," and urged Belgians to "react with determination, calmness and dignity" and "retain trust, as this trust is our strength."

Prime Minister Charles Michel announced three days of national mourning. "We have to be unified," he said.

On Monday, prosecutors said they were looking for 24-year-old Najim Laachraoui, another suspected Islamic State operative whose DNA was found in a Brussels apartment they believe was used to assemble the suicide vests used in Paris.

The Islamic State announcement said fighters kicked off the attack at the airport with gunfire before "several" of them detonated explosive belts. It said a single bomber detonated an explosives-belt at the subway station.

Alphonse Youla, who handles baggage security at the airport in the suburb of Zaventem, said he heard someone yelling in Arabic before the blasts. Afterward, he helped carry the injured, he said. "I saw people lying on the ground with a lot of blood who weren't moving anymore."

Then the powerful explosion hit Maelbeek subway station, very near the heart of the European quarter in Brussels.

"It was like an earthquake, the ground was trembling," said Christian Thiercelin, who was standing outside. He said he ran down to the tracks, where he said the explosion happened. "I saw at least two bodies on the ground. They weren't moving anymore."

Police closed the access road to the airport as emergency vehicles rushed in. Hundreds of passengers were still being evacuated hours after the blasts, many wrapped in airline blankets. Buses were arriving to take them away, but some headed out on their own along a highway, pulling their suitcases behind them.
