President Barack Obama, emphasizing U.S. allies' united front against Moscow, cast Russia's invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea as a violation of a European order painstakingly built from the rubble and bloodshed of World War II.

Capping off three days of intensive meetings with European leaders, Mr. Obama spent much of Wednesday telling U.S. allies that they need to "step up" their commitments, particularly on military security.

"Russia's leadership is challenging truths that only a few weeks ago seemed self-evident: that in the 21st century, the borders of Europe cannot be redrawn with force," Mr. Obama said.

Unless the U.S. and Europe take stern action to protect these principles, he warned: "That message would be heard not just in Europe but in Asia and the Americas, in Africa and the Middle East."

European officials responded to the prodding by agreeing to take steps to reduce their dependence on Russian natural gas and to improve the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's security posture.

Anders Fogh Rasmussen, NATO's secretary-general, said the alliance will "intensify our military cooperation with Ukraine," including helping modernize Ukrainian forces. "We will review the viability of our relationship with Russia," he said. "We will not seek confrontation, but we will not waver if challenged."

In Washington, however, U.K. Defense Minister Philip Hammond acknowledged NATO members, including the U.K. and U.S., face budget constraints.

"With budget constraints a real and present factor in both countries, it is incumbent upon us to explore new areas of cooperation," he said.

Mr. Obama invoked the long-standing U.S.-European alliance in an address in Brussels on Wednesday and argued that the Russian intervention has repercussions that could stretch far beyond a dispute over a small peninsula in Eastern Europe.

Mr. Obama's diplomatic effort to blunt what he described as Russia's reversion to "the old way of doing things" has paid some dividends.

He gained tentative approval from European leaders to adopt measures targeting key sectors of the Russian economy if President Vladimir Putin makes further military moves.

In addition, leaders of the Group of Seven leading nations, in a meeting called by Mr. Obama in the Netherlands, agreed to effectively suspend Russia from their elite international forum.

NATO said it would seek ways to beef up Eastern European security measures and the European Union and U.S. said they would pursue ways to loosen Europe's dependence on Russian energy.

The week also left unclear whether there would be additional European sanctions against Moscow for its annexation of Crimea.

Mr. Obama warned in appearances Wednesday that Russia would be punished further if it continued on its "current course."

But European officials have said they would tighten sanctions in the event of further acts of Russian aggression.

The efforts to tighten ties between America and Europe took place against the backdrop of a continued Russian military mobilization along Ukraine's eastern border, which has U.S. and Western officials increasingly worried.

U.S. and U.K. defense officials expressed concern about the buildup at a Pentagon news conference Wednesday. U.S. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel said Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu told him the Russian troops "had no intention of crossing the border into Ukraine."

"I told him that we looked forward to the Russians living up to their word if that was the case. But the reality is, they continue to build up their forces, so they need to make sure that they stay committed to what Minister Shoigu told me," Mr. Hagel said.

Mr. Hammond questioned whether the Russian forces are answering to the Russian defense chief, saying they appeared to be directed by Mr. Putin.

"All the evidence suggests that the Russian agenda is being very much run by President Putin personally, and other Russian players. . .may express views, but it's a moot point," he said.

A breakthrough on the crucial issue of financial support for Ukraine is possible on Thursday, when the International Monetary Fund is expected to announce a tentative bailout deal for Ukraine.

The deal is expected to be around $15 billion, part of a broader international aid package, people familiar with the negotiations said.

But the challenge of squeezing a Russian economy deeply intertwined with Europe's was underscored Wednesday by a meeting in Moscow in which the CEO of Siemens AG, Joe Kaeser, assured Mr. Putin that the German engineering giant will continue with long-term investments in Russia.

A senior administration official said the U.S. is coordinating with European allies to prepare a sanctions package that, if needed, would be diverse enough not to overwhelmingly impact one country.

"Everybody is well aware that different sectors will affect different countries and it's important to have a balance, assuming that things will deteriorate," the official said, adding that Mr. Obama stressed that point in his meetings this week. "London is very dependent on its financial sector. France is more dependent on arms. Germany does a lot of engineering and trade with Russia."

Experts on Russia challenged the Obama administration's view that Mr. Putin is becoming more isolated. Many top developing countries -- including China, Brazil, South Africa and India -- either have remained silent on the Kremlin's annexation of Crimea or have supported it. They also said a campaign against Moscow could break down on North-South grounds, rather than East-West.

"If we exclude Russia from the U.S.-EU systems, we know where they would go. They would turn toward Beijing," said Dimitri Simes, president of The Center for the National Interest, a Washington think tank.

Mr. Obama's discussions with European leaders will continue Thursday in meetings with the leaders of Italy.
