Two deadly explosions ripped through a crowd at the Boston Marathon on Monday, killing at least three people and injuring about 140, once again raising the specter of terrorism on American soil.

At about 2:50 p.m., some three hours after the winners had crossed the finish line but while thousands more runners still were on the streets, two bombs exploded 50 to 100 yards apart near the course's end in the city's crowded Back Bay section, Boston Police said.

Panicked spectators fled the scene as smoke from the blasts filled the air, sirens wailed and exhausted, disoriented runners and families raced to find one another amid the mayhem.

President Barack Obama, in a brief televised address, said he would put the full resources of the government behind the investigation. "Make no mistake. We will get to the bottom of this and we will find out who did this and we will find out why they did this," he said.

Mr. Obama didn't describe the explosions as a terrorist attack, saying "we don't yet have all the answers." But after his statement, a White House official said: "Any event with multiple explosive devices -- as this appears to be -- is clearly an act of terror, and will be approached as an act of terror."

Police said Monday evening they had no suspects in custody. U.S. officials said investigators were combing through video recordings and the wreckage at the scene to try to determine who placed the bombs.

Federal authorities consider it a "potential terrorist investigation," Richard DesLauriers, special agent in charge of the Boston office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said at a Monday night news briefing.

It was Patriots' Day in Boston, the Massachusetts holiday commemorating the first battles of the American Revolution. Schools and offices are closed, the Red Sox play a day game and the nation's oldest and most prestigious marathon takes over the streets.

More than half the runners had crossed the finish line at the time of the blasts. Those who hadn't were diverted from the course by police about a half mile from the end, witnesses said. Some 23,000 people had started the marathon, estimated the Boston Athletic Association, its organizer.

Thom Kenney, a 43-year-old Army veteran who recently returned from Afghanistan, had just crossed the finish line when the explosions rang out. "Most of the people were looking back at the first explosion, wondering what it was, when the second explosion went off," he said. "When that went off, we all started calling our families as fast as we could."

The explosions "sounded like an IED -- that was the first reaction that I had," he said, referring to the improvised explosive devices used in Afghanistan.

Police initially reported a third explosion at the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, about six miles away, then said it had been a fire in a mechanical room. But fearing more explosions or other events, authorities urged people to stay inside and avoid large crowds.

The blasts temporarily halted city's transportation system as well as flights. The Federal Aviation Administration ordered flights bound for Boston's Logan International Airport to remain at their original airports until late afternoon.

Hospitals around the city were flooded with victims bearing a range of injuries.

"These are very high-force, high-impact injuries so they cause a lot of damage to tissue and to bone," said Ron Walls, chairman of the department of emergency medicine at Brigham and Women's Hospital. Shrapnel embedded in some patients' skin seemed to be objects from the street, not from any explosive device, he said.

At Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Dr. Stephen Epstein, attending physician in the emergency department, said X-rays of patients showed metal balls that appeared to be ball bearings. "They look like BBs," he said, adding that the balls were distinct from the shrapnel thrown up from debris on the street. Dr. Epstein said some people are at risk of losing limbs.

Boston Police Commissioner Edward Davis called the bombs "powerful devices" but declined to describe them further. "There was no specific intelligence that anything was going to happen," Mr. Davis said at a news conference.

A Justice Department official said Attorney General Eric Holder directed agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives to investigate. The chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee, Rep. Michael McCaul (R., Texas), said that "if this is in fact a malicious attack, those responsible will be held accountable.""

Brent Cunningham, 46, had traveled from Sitka, Alaska, to run in the marathon. "We heard two explosions, and I thought, 'that had a 9/11 feel to it,' " he said.

Mr. Cunningham had finished the race and was walking in Boston Common with his family when the blasts hit. "It wasn't until we heard sirens, then we knew something had happened."

Beth Wolniewicz, a 46-year-old Chicago resident, said she had finished the race about three minutes before the initial blast. "I saw the first explosion. I never saw the second one go off," she said. "It was loud but more staggering was the velocity of the smoke. It was rising really quickly."

Paul Thompson, a spectator who is a sports cardiologist, has researched and published extensively about the health implications of running the Boston Marathon. Driving away from the bloody scene near the finish line Monday, Dr. Thompson couldn't speak without crying.

"For what? For what?" said the 65-year-old. "These people are totally innocent. They're not engaged in combat."

A 29-time finisher of the race who first witnessed it as a child at his father's knee, Dr. Thompson said he couldn't imagine the race ever being the same. "Unequivocally, it will change these events. It will become less fun. Less of a party. I just can't tell you how terrible I think this is."

The London Marathon is scheduled to take place this Sunday. In a statement released by the London Marathon Twitter account, Metropolitan Police Chief Superintendent Julia Pendry said of the coming race, "We will be reviewing our security arrangements in partnership with London Marathon."

Other cities across the country heightened security after the Boston explosions. New York Police Department officials activated emergency measures to protect "hotels and other prominent locations" in New York City, spokesman Paul Browne said Monday. Critical response vehicles were deployed to locations throughout the city "until more about the explosion is learned," he said.