President Barack Obama made an emphatic pitch for international trade dealsduring a visit to this German city Sunday, as he and Chancellor Angela Merkel tried to lift momentum for a trans-Atlantic agreement that is facing resistance in both countries.

The two leaders called on negotiators to move forward with the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, or TTIP, saying the window to strike a deal soon could close.

Amid skepticism in the U.S. and criticism from Republican and Democratic presidential candidates, Mr. Obama touted what he called the indisputable benefits of international trade and called for completing the accord with Europe before the end of the year.

"We've now been negotiating TTIP for three years. We have made important progress. But time is not on our side," Mr. Obama said in a speech at an industrial-technology trade fair here. "If we don't complete negotiations this year, then upcoming political transitions -- in the United States and Europe -- could mean this agreement won't be finished for quite some time."

Negotiations for the sweeping agreement, which would include the U.S. and the 28 member states of the European Union, have progressed slowly. Critics fear the deal could weaken regulations protecting consumers, labor and the environment. Mr. Obama said Sunday the aim is to strengthen standards while eliminating "regulatory and bureaucratic irritants and blockages to trade."

While the president aimed to build support for TTIP during his two-day visit, he also sought to boost a friend under fire, praising Ms. Merkel's openness to accepting refugees and vowing to work together on a range of security and economic issues.

The chancellor has faced a backlash at home for welcoming hundreds of thousands of refugees fleeing Syria and other war-torn areas.

Mr. Obama lauded her willingness to take on tough issues, saying that she is "on the right side of history on this." He also praised the EU migration deal with Turkey that she brokered last month.

After stops in Saudi Arabia and London, Mr. Obama arrived in Germany Sunday for talks with Ms. Merkel and to attend the industrial trade fair, called Hannover Messe.

On Monday, they will be joined by British Prime Minister David Cameron, French President Francois Hollande and Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi to tackle issues including Syria, Libya, migration and Islamic State.

After meeting with Ms. Merkel, Mr. Obama continued to express confidence that the U.S. and its European partners could completethe trans-Atlantic trade deal, while acknowledging that there is a higher degree of difficulty during an election year. He said people around the world are feeling unsettled by globalization even though international trade strengthens the economy.

"People visibly see a plant moving and jobs lost, and the narrative develops that this is weakening rather than strengthening the position of ordinary people and ordinary workers," Mr. Obama said following discussions with Ms. Merkel. "That, I think, is what drives a lot of suspicion, understandably, of these trade deals."

He said later, during remarks at the trade fair, that the politics of trade are difficult, "but we have to keep making our case." Ms. Merkel pointed to a limited time frame in which the trade deal could be negotiated.

In the U.S., presidential candidates in both parties have expressed opposition to the trade deals the president has pursued, raising questions about the agreements' prospects once Mr. Obama leaves office. The skeptics include Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton, Mr. Obama's former secretary of state, who once supported a separate Pacific pact but now opposes it.

Mr. Obama predicted trade deals would find a warmer reception after election season. Ms. Merkel declined to weigh in on U.S. politics, even though Republican front-runner Donald Trump has had much to say about her, calling her welcoming of migrants "insane."

"First, I'm concentrating fully on the challenges of the year 2016, which I'm rather filled up with," she said in response to a question about Mr. Trump's criticism of NATO and her refugee policy. "Second, I'm observing with interest the American election campaign."

The two leaders said they also discussed tenuous cease-fires in Ukraine and Syria, and the need to put pressure on Russian President Vladimir Putin to push to scale back violence in both.
