Iran was thrown into confusion when the state-run news agency declared President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad the winner in Friday's polls as his main challenger alleged fraud and claimed victory by a large margin.

The dueling claims ratcheted up the stakes in the already-tense elections, the most rambunctious since the founding of the Islamic Republic 30 years ago. A prolonged political standoff would heighten the uncertainty hanging over a country that is one of the world's biggest oil producers and Washington's main irritant in the volatile Middle East.

Despite the official announcement of Mr. Ahmadinejad's victory, Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who has final say in all matters of state, hadn't weighed in on the results. Iran's interior ministry, the official tabulator, said Mr. Ahmadinejad was leading but not all ballots were counted and final results would be announced Saturday morning.

Challenger Mir Hossein Mousavi said he had won by a large margin during what he called an "emergency" news conference in Tehran. He also complained of voting irregularities, including the rigging of votes and deliberate attempts by the government to block people from casting ballots.

"I am the winner of this election across the nation with a landslide," said Mr. Mousavi, a former Iranian prime minister, in a weary voice. He asked the supreme leader, Mr. Khamenei, to intervene. "There is no going back from the path that we have started," said Mr. Mousavi. "The people of Iran thought that by coming into the streets in such numbers they can change the situation in the country."

Late Friday, dozens of supporters gathered outside of several of Mr. Mousavi's campaign offices, shouting "God is great" and complaining about the reported results. Riot police aggressively dispersed one crowd by using batons and pepper spray. Supporters of Mr. Ahmadinejad honked their horns and gathered outside the Interior Ministry to celebrate, chanting provocative slogans against their opponent.

The dueling claims of victory sowed confusion in the capital. "This news they are announcing is very strange. But it is not confirmed yet, so we have to wait," said Sam Rostami, a 33-year-old businessman from northern Tehran. "This is a bit shocking for a start," he said.

After Mr. Mousavi's press conference, around midnight local time, Iran's official IRNA news agency declared on its Web site that Mr. Ahmadinejad was the winner, with 69.4% of the votes, compared to 28.4% for the second-place Mr. Mousavi. Conservative candidate Mohsen Rezaei and reformist Mehdi Karroubi were running a distant third and fourth, respectively, according to IRNA. But the official results from the interior ministry hadn't been released.

"Dr. Ahmadinejad, by winning the most votes in the 10th presidential elections, has secured his victory," IRNA reported.

Political observers warned of a potentially turbulent week ahead as Mr. Mousavi's supporters hear the reports of their candidate's defeat and his allegations of fraud. One popular slogan shouted by Mr. Mousavi's supporters at the campaign rallies: "If there is cheating, Iran will blow up."

A senior person close to the regime said the unusually fierce political battle between Mr. Mousavi and Mr. Ahmadinejad had gone all the way up the clerical hierarchy. The Supreme Leader, Mr. Khamenei, has so far not intervened in elections nor endorsed any of the candidates, though it is expected he will call on the Iranian people to accept the official results peacefully.

There was some violence earlier Friday. Campaign offices at Mr. Mousavi's northern Tehran headquarters were raided by unknown assailants and staff were harassed, according to Mohamad Reza Jalaeipour, the campaign's 26-year-old chief strategist, and others.

In this election, the race for the presidency wasn't just about the candidates but also about Iran's direction. Mr. Mousavi embodied hope among his supporters inside and outside Iran for more moderate, pragmatic administration, while Mr. Ahmadinejad represented the republic's tradition of radical ideology.

In the last week of the campaign, throngs of Mr. Mousavi's green-clad supporters broke long-standing taboos about openly criticizing Mr. Ahmadinejad. They frequently burst into spontaneous demonstrations and rallies well into the early morning hours in the days leading up to Friday's vote. Mr. Ahmadinejad's supporters also were boisterous, rallying through Tehran's streets waving Iranian flags.

While the two sides sparred aggressively, they were mostly peaceful shouting matches. And after an official halt to campaigning Thursday morning, Tehran returned to its normal bustle.

On election day, throngs of voters flooded into polling stations. State media reported unprecedented turnout among Iran's 43 million voters. At many polling stations across the country, crowds formed lines that snaked several miles.

Turnout was so high that some polling stations were kept open hours after their scheduled 6 p.m. close. The late voting led many analysts to expect official returns -- initially expected no earlier than Saturday -- to be delayed. Indeed, state media reported late Friday that official results wouldn't be available for at least 12 hours after polls closed.

Through out the day voters, particularly Mr. Mousavi's supporters, fretted about cheating. They brought their own pens, they stayed away from mobile polls and gathered at polling stations inside schools instead of mosques. "I believe what my eyes tell me. If they announce Ahmadinejad the winner I will lose my faith in this regime forever," said Abdul Rasul Suliemani, a 37-year-old employee of the government who had waited four hours in line to vote for Mr. Mousavi.

"Ahmadineajd deserves to win. We had the revolution because we want an Islamic regime, not a reformist government," said Mariam Ghasemi, 26-year-old mother of two, whose husband's salary had been doubled last year.

Mr. Mousavi said there was an organized effort to block his campaign staff from communicating with one another and the public on Friday. The Ministry of Telecommunications imposed a nation-wide block of text messaging from mobiles. Mr. Mousavi's supervisors at polls were planning to report discrepancies by text messages.

Thousands of Mr. Mousavi's volunteer supervisors were not issued credentials by the Interior Ministry, which runs the elections, and were barred from polling stations, Mr. Mousavi said. Internet speed was slower than usual all day and by noon nearly all Web sites affiliated with Mr. Mousavi were blocked.

The campaign said that a group of people, who identified themselves as intelligence officers, entered Mr. Mousavi's campaign headquarters in northern Tehran on Friday evening demanding that the young strategists at the campaign, responsible for much of deploying new media techniques, leave the premises.

Mr. Mousavi's campaign lawyer, Mahmoud Alizadeh, said in an interview that Tehran's chief prosecutor informed Mr. Mousavi's campaign lawyer that security agents would arrive Saturday morning with a court order to shut down all their communication operations.

An Ahmadinejad victory could significantly complicate President Barack Obama's foreign-policy agenda. Mr. Obama and many of his advisers had been voicing optimism in recent days that the U.S. president's outreach to the Islamic world, including his speech in Cairo last week, was helping facilitate a more moderate trend in the Middle East. They cited the victory in Lebanese elections last week of a pro-Western coalition against a political bloc led by Hezbollah.

"We are excited to see what appears to be a robust debate taking place in Iran," Mr. Obama said Friday at the White House before the dueling claims of victory came out.

Many Iran analysts note that true power in Tehran rests with hard-line Ayatollah Khamenei. But a victory by a relatively moderate leader, such as Mr. Mousavi, could more easily facilitate talks between Washington and Tehran, they said.

Many U.S. and European officials involved in Iran policy fear Mr. Ahmadinejad's re-election could raise the prospect of sustained conflict between the West and Tehran in the coming months.
