John Kerry's decorated service in Vietnam took center stage last night as Democrats sought to bolster his candidacy by challenging President Bush's greatest strength.

The evening showcased his foreign-born wife, Teresa Heinz Kerry, who wooed her audience with a self-deprecating joke about her outspokenness, a poetic description of what America means to immigrants and the world and a forceful embrace of her husband's policies on subjects from the environment to foreign affairs.

"John believes we can, and we must, lead the world, as America, unique among nations, always should, by showing the face, not of its fears, but of our hopes," she said.

Her husband "is a fighter. He earned his medals the old-fashioned way, by putting his life on the line for his country," Mrs. Heinz Kerry said. His experience in Vietnam as a Navy lieutenant, including the friends lost, "testified to the awful toll exacted by leaders who mistake stubbornness for strength."

Earlier in the evening, Massachusetts Sen. Ted Kennedy took a harsher tone, accusing the Bush administration of making the U.S. less safe by alienating allies and attacking Saddam Hussein. "In these challenging times for our country, in these fateful times for the world, America needs a genuine uniter, not a divider who only claims to be a uniter," Mr. Kennedy said.

The senator and Mrs. Heinz Kerry delivered their addresses on a night in which Democratic strategists hoped to portray their presumed nominee to voters as a strong leader who could carry on the battle against terrorism. Although Mr. Bush's approval ratings have slipped recently, he continues to enjoy an advantage over Mr. Kerry for his handling of terrorism. In public-opinion polls, many voters say they still don't know very much about Mr. Kerry, despite his lengthy public career and millions of dollars in television commercials.

But organizers at the party's national convention were facing a tougher-than-expected job, as the FleetCenter here remained abuzz over the powerful performance offered Monday night by former President Bill Clinton, contrasting the policies of the Democratic and Republican parties.

And debate continued over the import of a televised clip of Mrs. Heinz Kerry earlier this week, in which she accused a conservative newspaper's reporter of misquoting her and, in final frustration, told him to "shove it."

It wasn't much help either that the major television networks decided not to air the second-night lineup of speakers, which included retiring Missouri Rep. Richard Gephardt; Ron Reagan, the late president's son, who appealed for expanded stem-cell research, and newcomer Barack Obama, an Illinois lawyer favored to win a U.S. Senate seat.

Vermont Gov. Howard Dean, who gave war opponents a strong voice in the Democratic primaries, received a roaring ovation. "We're not going to let those who disagree with us to shout us down under a banner of false patriotism," he said.

In a veiled reference to Mr. Bush's lack of service in Vietnam, Mr. Obama said Mr. Kerry repeatedly has made "tough choices when easier ones were available."

As if mindful of the networks' ignoring the Boston activities yesterday, Mr. Kerry kept to the road, staging two visual spectacles aimed at television. At the prime-time news hour, he was host of a rally on the same Philadelphia Art Museum steps made famous in the movie "Rocky."

Earlier Mr. Kerry stood in front of the retired battleship USS Wisconsin in Norfolk, Va., with Elliott "Skip" Barker, a fellow Navy swift-boat commander in Vietnam. Mr. Barker spoke of the lessons they both learned in combat that taught Mr. Kerry to always measure war against the lives lost. "John Kerry knows that question. It is part of his soul, and he will get that answer before he sends my grandchildren and your children to war," Mr. Barker said.

In his Norfolk remarks, Mr. Kerry pressed Mr. Bush to extend the life of the controversial 9/11 Commission to ensure its recommendations are carried out. Capitol Hill Republicans and Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge have expressed reservations about some of them.