Terror swept the French capital late Friday as six separate attacks -- in a bustling nightlife district and outside a soccer stadium -- left more than 100 people dead in one of the bloodiest assaults in the country's history.

The sheer scale of the mayhem left authorities reeling. The government declared a state of emergency, sending military forces onto the streets of Paris, sealing off roads and reinstating border controls. Sirens blared across the city as police and emergency workers rushed to respond.

Authorities said early Saturday they believed all the attackers were dead. Yet the seemingly coordinated attacks left France's intelligence and security services facing one of their worst-nightmare scenarios: several armed groups moving undetected and wreaking havoc simultaneously.

"An unprecedented terrorist attack is under way," President Francois Hollande said in a televised address shortly after he himself had been evacuated from the soccer stadium. "This is a horror."

As a precaution, police urged Parisians to stay home and avoid outdoor public events. The Paris prosecutor's office said there could be more than 120 deaths in all, and that five "terrorists" had been "neutralized."

The highest death toll was at the Bataclan, a popular concert venue. Police estimates ranged from around 80 to more than 100, with dozens injured.

Two gunmen began mowing down spectators, taking others hostage before they blew themselves up using explosive belts when police moved in, authorities said.

Four people were killed as police took control of the building, police said; it wasn't clear if that included the attackers.

"It seems unreal. We saw bodies falling from the balconies," said another woman who was inside the Bataclan, speaking on BFM television. "They said nothing except that it's Francois Hollande's fault that they wanted to kill us all."

Mr. Hollande later visited the scene, where he promised to fight back. "We're going into battle. We will be pitiless," he said.

Another 38 people were killed in five separate shootings in the 10th and 11th arrondissements, according to Paris' chief prosecutor Francois Molins. The area to the east and south of Place de la Republique is typically thronged with diners and partygoers on a Friday night.

The head of police in Paris said gunmen walked down the streets, shooting at people in cafes and restaurants.

Other attackers set off at least two explosions outside the Stade de France soccer stadium, where a large crowd, including Mr. Hollande, had gathered to watch the French and German national teams play. Play continued but spectators later streamed onto the field and out the exits.

Place de la Republique is also near the scene of the January attack on the former offices of the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo, part of an assault that left 17 dead. Those perpetrators claimed allegiance to Islamic State and an al Qaeda affiliate.

It was unclear who was behind Friday's attacks. France has joined the U.S.-led air campaign against Islamic State territory in Iraq and Syria, stirring vows of retaliation from the militant group.

Friday's assault puts U.S. security officials on edge. Authorities in New York increased the police presence at sensitive sites in what they called a precautionary measure that wasn't based on any specific intelligence.

Within an hour of the first sketchy but horrific-sounding details, President Barack Obama had been briefed by national security officials and minutes afterward made nationally televised remarks, branding the attacks a terrorist act and vowing U.S. assistance.

The attacks weren't just on Paris but "on all humanity," Mr. Obama told reporters at the White House.

"We're going to do whatever it takes to work with the French people and with nations around the world to bring these terrorists to justice and to go after any terrorist networks that go after our people," Mr. Obama said.

Buildings around the world were lit up in France's tricolors in honor of the dead. The World Trade Center's spire, San Francisco's City Hall and Toronto's CN Tower all tweeted photos. The Eiffel Tower in Las Vegas went dark.

France is weeks away from hosting an international summit on climate change, with more than 100 heads of states and governments expected to attend.

Mr. Obama spoke about the attacks just ahead of his trip to the Group of 20 summit in Turkey, where the fight against Islamic State and the crisis in Syria will be high on the agenda.

Mr. Hollande was also scheduled to attend the G-20 summit, but called off his trip after the attacks, sending two ministers in his place.

The early reports of the Paris violence suggested a degree of sophistication and coordination not seen even in the earlier Paris terrorist attack in January carried out by supporters of the Islamic State terror group.

The apparent use of explosives Friday night, and the likelihood that a significant number of terrorist operatives were required to carry out the seemingly coordinated attacks, were particularly alarming to U.S. counterterrorism officials, because it suggested that the operational capability and threat posed by would-be terrorists was expanding.

After the January attacks on Charlie Hebdo and a kosher grocery store, French counter-terrorism officials had warned the country was ill-equipped to deter the new breed of AK-47-wielding gunmen who in recent months have struck not only in Paris, but in Brussels, Copenhagen and the capitals of Mali and Tunisia.

At the time, the French government responded by demanding new powers to upgrade its spycraft capabilities, mainly on Internet and telecoms networks. Following Friday's carnage, however, counter-terrorism officials may now request a bigger hammer to combat terror groups, which may force the French government to contemplate further restrictions in civil liberties.


