Nelson Mandela, who rose from militant antiapartheid activist to become the unifying president of a democratic South Africa and a global symbol of racial reconciliation, died at his Johannesburg home following a lengthy stay at a Pretoria hospital, the government said Thursday. He was 95.

In a state television address, President Jacob Zuma said Mr. Mandela had died that evening after a long illness. "Our nation has lost its greatest son. Our people have lost a father," said Mr. Zuma, dressed in a dark jacket and reading his statement in deep somber tones. "Although we knew that this day would come, nothing can diminish our sense of a profound and enduring loss."

In a somber statement from the White House, President Barack Obama said Mr. Mandela "achieved more than could be expected of any man. Today he's gone home and we've lost one of the most influential, courageous and profoundly good human beings that any of us will share time with on this Earth."

He also expressed his condolences in a phone conversation with Mr. Zuma.

As Mr. Zuma addressed the nation, passersby stopped outside Mr. Mandela's home in Johannesburg, crying and carrying flowers and lighting candles. South Africa's state television broadcaster played "Amazing Grace," as it scrolled through pictures of Mr. Mandela's life and his struggle against apartheid.

Mr. Mandela spent nearly three months in the hospital through September, initially to treat a lung infection. It was the latest in a series of increasingly severe ailments South Africa's first black president had battled since contracting tuberculosis during his nearly three decades in prison for opposing the former white-minority regime.

Though Mr. Mandela had stepped down from the presidency in 1999, he remained a father figure for a country going through wrenching economic and political change. South Africa's economy has struggled to grow about 2% this year, well below government targets of 7%, and unemployment among young people is close to 80%. In recent years, protests in predominantly black townships have erupted over poor public services and a dearth of job opportunities. Many black South Africans, born after the dawn of democracy in 1994, are channeling their frustration toward the current government, led by Mr. Mandela's African National Congress.

It was as a prisoner that Mr. Mandela first became a rallying point for opponents of apartheid. After he was sentenced to life in prison in 1964, he spent more than 25 years behind bars, much of it in a maximum-security prison on Robben Island, off the coast of Cape Town.

By the time he was released from a different prison in 1990, the tables had been turned. South Africa had become a pariah nation, and Mr. Mandela would lead his country's re-embrace of a world that had spurned its racist government.

With South African President F.W. de Klerk, with whom he had met secretly with other apartheid officials in prison, Mr. Mandela would pick apart the machinery of white political domination through painstaking negotiations. Those negotiations laid the groundwork for the election in 1994 of the country's first black president -- Mr. Mandela.

Mr. Mandela inherited a fractured nation. He led it back from the brink of civil war, forming a government of national unity that demolished apartheid and established a constitution that is one of the most liberal in the world in terms of human rights.

Mr. Mandela's tall task was, as he put it, to find the "middle ground between white fears and black hopes." But he also needed to reconcile disparate factions within his party, the African National Congress. Some influential ANC leaders wanted to take a tougher line against whites after triumphing at the ballot box, and some argued for a wealth tax to speed the redistribution of the country's resources, said Verne Harris, a historian at the Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory, which houses the archives of the former president.

"There were many who argued the case for tough love -- don't make it easy for them," said Mr. Harris. "Reconciliation was a beautiful fit for South Africa, but we forget that it wasn't the only approach being discussed at the time."

During his six decades in the public arena, Mr. Mandela wasn't above precipitous shifts in position. He initially put his faith in Gandhian nonviolence, but when strikes and protests began to seem futile, he founded a band of saboteurs. He believed in obedience to the party but acted unilaterally at turning points in the struggle.

Even occasional critics would come to see Mr. Mandela as the political glue that held his party, and later the country, together.

Mr. de Klerk, who would serve as Mr. Mandela's deputy after the country's first democratic vote, said his former adversary "could be brutal" in negotiations. But the pair, who shared the 1993 Nobel Peace Prize for the country's democratic transition, was able to sell compromises to supporters who differed radically in outlook.

Rolihlahla Mandela -- "Nelson" was added when he started school -- was born July 18, 1918, to a chief of the Thembu tribe of the Xhosa people in South Africa. He grew up in a village of mud huts and grass rooftops, the floors made of earth smeared with cow dung, in the land known as the Transkei. Women farmed corn, or mealies, pumpkins and beans; men left their families to work on white-owned farms or mines. Blacks at the time had few rights in the new country, founded by white European immigrants known as Afrikaners.

Mr. Mandela was the first in his family to attend school and eventually began working toward a law degree in Johannesburg. He hoped for a civil-service job in the Native Affairs Department in the government, about as high as a black man could aspire at the time.

His struggle for civil rights involved "a steady accumulation of one thousand slights, one thousand indignities, one thousand unremembered moments, [that] produced in me an anger, a rebelliousness, a desire to fight the system that impoverished my people," he wrote in his autobiography.

He joined the African National Congress and helped found its Youth League. The ANC became the center of resistance to apartheid, the South African system of racial segregation, introduced after the National Party came to power in 1948.

Years of confrontations with authorities, including the Sharpeville massacre of 1960 in which 69 protesters were killed by police, persuaded Mr. Mandela to abandon his commitment to Gandhian nonviolence. He organized a sabotage unit and went underground.

Mr. Mandela was arrested in 1962 and put on trial for inciting strikes. Rather than defend himself against the charges, he indicted the apartheid state in a four-hour speech that became one of the founding texts of a postapartheid state. He was sentenced to five years in prison.

Months later, he was charged with sabotage and conspiracy to overthrow the government, a capital crime, after a police raid on a Johannesburg farmhouse turned up plans for guerrilla warfare. This time he was sentenced to life in prison, along with seven other ANC members.

At the opening of what became known as the Rivonia trial, Mr. Mandela delivered another long speech that ended with his vision for a new South Africa, and what he was willing to sacrifice for it.

Mr. Mandela, then 46 years old, spent the next 18 years on Robben Island, a former leper colony turned maximum-security prison.

He entered Robben Island a militant who had failed to topple a government, but came out as a leader who succeeded in building a new nation on a platform of peace and reconciliation among races. Mr. Mandela would later credit prison for uniting the country's future leaders, giving them time to talk through differences and forging a collective will to persevere. In an early sign of how he would reach across the political and racial divide, Mr. Mandela taught himself Afrikaans and used the language to charm his guards -- and elicit more sympathetic treatment.

Outside, the struggle in South Africa had grown increasingly violent. ANC and other antiapartheid fighters were arrested, detained and tortured. Mr. Mandela became the face who transcended fragmented freedom movements.

Mr. Mandela's greatest contribution was his decision to begin negotiations with the apartheid state while he was still in detention. The apartheid government, increasingly isolated internationally, was looking for a way out. South Africa kept negotiations secret, and Mr. Mandela didn't inform his ANC comrades.

"There are times when a leader must move out ahead of the flock, go off in a new direction, confident he is leading his people the right way," he wrote in his memoir.

Five years of private meetings followed, with Mr. Mandela sitting down with various officials, and ultimately the president, Mr. de Klerk. In his opening speech to Parliament in 1990, Mr. de Klerk scrapped a ban on opposition parties and announced the release of political prisoners, including Mr. Mandela. "The season of violence is over," Mr. de Klerk said at the time. "The time for reconstruction and reconciliation has arrived."

Mr. Mandela was released on Feb. 11, 1990. He emerged from the prison gates and raised his fist to a roar from the crowds who had gathered to greet him.

Many whites supported Mr. Mandela and had joined protests for his release. But there remained unresolved anger from blacks over the apartheid state.

After a four-year transitional government, elections were held on April 27, 1994, open for the first time in South Africa's history to all men and women of voting age. Mr. Mandela was elected president.

By ending white minority rule peacefully, through compromises with Mr. de Klerk, Mr. Mandela set a new standard for resolving conflicts far beyond South Africa. He showed how nations divided by ethnic, racial and religious violence and hate may begin to come together, even if that process at home has been more painful and taken longer than most people had hoped.

Unlike many African leaders hailed as heroes and freedom fighters, Mr. Mandela stepped down from office after only one term. He established three foundations in his name, dedicated to tolerance and preserving the history of the antiapartheid fight. He married his third wife, Graca Machel, on his 80th birthday, and settled into a spacious home in a suburb of Johannesburg.

In the final years of his life, Mr. Mandela largely retreated from public view, spending time with his children and grandchildren in the rural village of Qunu in the Eastern Cape, not far from where he was born.

Mr. Mandela's hospital visits sparked panic in government and the media. The anxiety underscored how hungry the public remained for information about the former political prisoner who became the country's first black president, a transition that changed how the world viewed South Africa and how South Africans viewed themselves.