President Barack Obama and former Vice President Dick Cheney squared off in contentious, back-to-back addresses over the Bush era's terrorism policies, starkly dramatizing the wide divide on how best to safeguard America while protecting its rights and traditions.

Mr. Obama declared that the nation had gone "off course" under former President George W. Bush by endorsing aggressive interrogation tactics and offshore prisons, minutes before Mr. Cheney defended them as "legal, essential, justified, successful and the right thing to do" in a speech across town.

The contentious tit for tat riveted Washington, escalating the growing national debate over the president's plans to rewrite the Bush administration's terrorism policies, including closing the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Those plans have drawn fire from Republicans, stoked doubts among Democrats and put Mr. Obama on the defensive in the biggest political challenge of his young administration. Leading the charge has been Mr. Cheney, who has been unusually aggressive in attacking those policies and trying to rally Republican opposition even as polls show him remaining unpopular with the public.

Mr. Obama, speaking forcefully from the rotunda of the National Archives before the U.S. Constitution and Declaration of Independence, sought to regain the high ground in the debate, arguing that his changes were needed to restore "the power of our most fundamental values." He conceded that some key Bush-era policies would remain, from extralegal military commissions to indefinite detentions. But he said he had hoped that by banning interrogation techniques that others have called torture, and by vowing to close Guantanamo Bay in his first week as president, he would move beyond the divisive debates of the past few years, and pivot to his ambitious domestic agenda.

"We went off course," the president said. "And this is not my assessment alone. It was an assessment that was shared by the American people who nominated candidates for president from both major parties who, despite our many differences, called for a new approach -- one that rejected torture and one that recognized the imperative of closing the prison at Guantanamo Bay."

Speaking at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, Mr. Cheney responded: "After the most lethal and devastating terrorist attack ever, seven and a half years without a repeat is not a record to be rebuked or scorned, much less criminalized. It is a record to be continued until the danger has passed."

Mr. Obama has struggled in recent days to find a way to reframe the debate. Republicans and some Democrats have balked on his plans to close Guantanamo without a clear plan for the prisoners being held there. On Wednesday, the Senate voted 90-6 to strip funding for the closure of Guantanamo from a war spending bill, following a similar vote in the House, underscoring how bipartisan the concerns have become.

Mr. Obama scheduled his speech late last week, after Mr. Cheney's speech already had been publicly scheduled. White House spokesman Robert Gibbs said the timing "wasn't based on the fact that anybody else was speaking." Mr. Cheney delayed the scheduled beginning of his remarks by half an hour to wait for Mr. Obama to finish.

Late Thursday, it wasn't clear whether Mr. Obama had allayed doubts. "We're all awaiting the details of the plan and the president is going to come up with one," Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid said after the speech, suggesting that Democrats still needed information before they draw ranks around the Obama policies.

With concerns rising in his own party, the president put out details on his terrorism policies. For the first time, he publicly acknowledged nearly 100 detainees would have to be held indefinitely even though the U.S. would be unable to charge them with war crimes.

Calling it the "toughest single issue we will face," Mr. Obama said many detainees -- some because evidence in their case may have been tainted by civilian legal standards -- would have to be held because they continued to threaten U.S. security.

"These are people who, in effect, remain at war with the United States," he said.

Mr. Obama has promised a more detailed plan for closing Guantanamo in July. While he said that, under his plan, some prisoners would inevitably land in the U.S., he said they would be in "highly secure prisons that ensure the public safety."

In his 35-minute address, Mr. Cheney contended the Bush administration methods saved thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of lives, by eliciting crucial information that helped disrupt terrorist attacks.

Mr. Cheney saved some of his toughest criticism for the Obama administration's decision to release memos detailing the interrogation program, including the legal rationale applied by the Bush administration and the specifics about tactics that were applied to individual terrorist suspects. He said the release "was flatly contrary to the national security interest of the United States," adding that it gave terrorists "a lengthy insert for their training manual."

Mr. Obama said releasing the memos in no way helped aspiring terrorists train against U.S. tactics, since the interrogation techniques were now banned by the White House.

Thursday's speech included Mr. Obama's most detailed explanation to date of his plans for the 240 detainees. He said the administration will try to bring some of the accused enemy fighters before civilian courts "wherever feasible," while an additional 50 have been deemed safe to transfer to another country.

That leaves the rest to either be tried by military tribunals or held indefinitely in U.S. prisons. Pentagon officials have said about 80 are expected to be charged with war crimes and nearly 100 will remain in legal limbo.

Mr. Obama said he would work with Congress to come up with legal standards for those detainees. He said he was committed there would be judicial and congressional oversight of their detention.

The Obama administration has recently won federal court backing for the notion that laws of war give the government the right to indefinitely detain members of al Qaeda and affiliated groups.

The legal framework needed for such a policy has been debated within the administration. On Wednesday at the White House, the president discussed outlines of a plan with civil-liberties and human-rights groups, including the American Civil Liberties Union.

These groups led the legal assault that won important court-ordered curbs on the legal underpinnings of the Bush administration's national-security policy. They promised to do the same to Mr. Obama's.
