President Barack Obama signed into law Tuesday a sweeping overhaul of the U.S. health-care system, as the yearlong political brawl over the measure entered a new phase that might only be settled in this fall's elections.

The audience of about 300 lawmakers, congressional aides and White House staff who had carried the legislation through its improbable course interrupted him repeatedly with standing ovations. Several snapped photos to mark the moment.

The day's events opened an intense White House effort to sell the new law to an often-skeptical public. The president emphasized provisions that take effect right away, such as rules barring insurers from rejecting children who are already sick. He also singled out individual Americans who will be helped, a technique that's likely to be repeated often between now and the November elections.

"After a century of striving, after a year of debate, after a historic vote, health-care reform is no longer an unmet promise. It is the law of the land," the president said at a rally after signing the bill.

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) scoffed at the ceremonies convened by Democrats, saying the party will pay a price for going against the public will. "Democrats here in Washington can celebrate all they want. But that celebration is going to be short-lived," he said. "The American people aren't fooled."

Mr. Obama noted that major parts of the bill will take time to implement, including a requirement that most Americans buy insurance, a government-run exchange to sell coverage and tax credits to defray the cost.

The law also faces a legal challenge. More than a dozen states filed suit Tuesday to stop it, asserting, among other things, that its mandate on individuals to buy insurance was unconstitutional. The Justice Department said it would "vigorously defend" the measure.

Nor was the legislative struggle over health-care quite over. A few hours after the signing ceremony, the Senate voted 56-40 to open debate on a package of changes to the law sought by Democrats that Republicans vowed to vigorously oppose. The House approved the changes alongside the main bill Sunday.

In the packed White House East Room, the mood was celebratory, but there were reminders of the political pressures that divided Democrats over the past year and the challenges they faced in implementing the bill and selling it to the public.

Mr. Obama said lawmakers had shown "uncommon courage" and noted they had "taken their lumps during this difficult debate."

"Yes, we did," said Rep. Gary Ackerman (D., N.Y.), to laughter.

Rep. Bart Stupak (D., Mich.), who threatened to vote no over abortion but ultimately voted yes, sealing the bill's passage, was in attendance. So was Rep. Dennis Kucinich (D., Ohio), who bashed the bill but voted for it, saying he didn't want the president and his agenda to fail. And there was Sen. Blanche Lincoln (D., Ark.), who faces a bruising re-election battle and is already under attack for supporting the bill.

Near the front of the room sat Vicki Kennedy, whose late husband, Sen. Edward Kennedy, championed universal health care for decades, but died last August before the bill made it through the Senate.

Vice President Joe Biden offered one of his signature unscripted moments after introducing the president with lavish praise. He leaned into Mr. Obama and whispered, in an aside picked up by a nearby microphone, "This is a big f------ deal."

The White House didn't contradict him. Spokesman Robert Gibbs later replied on his Twitter account, "And yes Mr. Vice President, you're right."

There didn't appear to be any Republicans in the East Room, which was to be expected because the health-care bill failed to garner a single Republican vote for final passage.

The companion legislation now before the Senate was being considered under so-called reconciliation rules, which provide for only 20 hours of debate and require a simple majority vote for passage instead of the 60 votes needed to defeat an opposition filibuster.

Republicans were still working to slow the process. Under reconciliation, there is no limit on the number of amendments that can be offered on the floor. Republicans Tuesday were readying dozens of amendments. If all of them are offered, the Senate could be plunged into a marathon spate of voting late this week.

The reconciliation bill would beef up subsidies to help individuals buy health insurance and delay the effective date of a new tax on high-cost plans. It also includes a proposal to overhaul the federal student-loan program, ending taxpayer subsidies to banks and shifting lending responsibilities to the government.

The Senate parliamentarian denied a potential challenge that could have brought down the reconciliation bill, congressional aides and lawmakers said.

Under Senate rules, bills affecting Social Security can't proceed under reconciliation. Republicans argued that tax-policy changes in the legislation would result in a reduction of payroll-tax receipts, effectively undermining Social Security, which is funded by payroll levies.

The parliamentarian concluded the argument was without merit.
