Oil stopped flowing into the Gulf of Mexico from BP PLC's blown-out well for the first time in nearly three months. But BP and U.S. officials warned it was far too early to declare victory.

BP said Thursday afternoon it shut the valves on a new cap on the well as it tested its latest effort to contain the massive spill.

That temporarily stopped the surge of crude oil that has fouled a wide swath of the Gulf from Texas to Florida, upended domestic politics in the U.S. and raised the prospect that the oil industry will face significant new government curbs on its activities on and offshore.

The test could take up to 48 hours to complete. If the results are ideal, the cap could be used to stop the flow from the well while work resumes on efforts to plug it permanently. More likely, a successful test will enable BP to siphon all the oil from the well to ships on the surface in a controlled manner, eliminating leaks until a permanent fix is made.

Although BP has managed to temporarily halt the undersea gusher, company and federal officials insist there is only one permanent solution to the disaster: A relief well that will tap into the shaft of the blown-out well and allow BP to pour heavy drilling fluid and cement into the oil reservoir, 19,000 feet below the water's surface, to kill the leak for good.

BP has said the relief well could be finished by the end of July. U.S. officials have stuck to an estimate of mid-August.

BP and federal officials sought Thursday to avoid appearing too optimistic, in light of setbacks to earlier efforts to stop the flow. President Barack Obama on Thursday called the progress a positive sign, but cautioned: "We're still in the testing phase.""

BP said the undersea cameras trained on the well head could likely show oil flowing again during the testing.

"What I'm trying to do is maintain my emotions remembering this is the start of our test," Kent Wells, a BP senior vice president, said Thursday. "I don't want to sort of create a false sense of excitement."

Still, BP's shares jumped on the news. Its American depositary shares closed Thursday up 7.6% at $38.92, the stock's highest level since June 4. The share price, which hit a 14-year low in late June, has recovered 36% of its slide since the April 20 explosion of the Deepwater Horizon rig triggered the spill.

Mr. Wells said BP engineers would consult every six hours with government scientists and decide whether to continue with the test.

The key to determining whether the cap can contain the oil until the relief well is done will be the results of pressure tests BP is conducting on the well. If the tests show that pressure under the cap is low, that means oil coming up from the underground reservoir is escaping out of the pipe and seeping into underground rock formations. This could present a problem as the oil fills up tiny holes in the rock and creates new fractures. Ultimately, the oil could find its way up to the seabed and begin leaking into the Gulf.

"We would not want that," retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen, head of the federal spill response effort, said Thursday.

Officials say there is very little information about the condition of the well underground. The steel pipes might be in good shape. Or they could have been damaged by the initial blowout in April, or worn down over the past three months.

Richard Haut, a senior research scientist at the Houston Advanced Research Center and a well-technology expert, said dirt and debris shooting up the well alongside oil and natural gas could have worn down the walls of the pipe, allowing oil to escape into the rocks. "That's the worst-case scenario," he said. "You don't want to see oil escaping through the sides."

If the well has been damaged, closing off the flow of oil and increasing the pressure could potentially worsen the problems. One reason for pessimism is that earlier this summer when officials pumped heavy drilling mud down the well in an ultimately unsuccessful effort to stop the flow, they were able to build up only a relatively low pressure.

Even if the well test succeeds -- and pressure readings remain high -- Mr. Allen said engineers planned to open the valves back up by Saturday afternoon and let the well flow again, collecting most but not all of the oil. New seismic tests will then be taken to see if there is any evidence of oil leaking out of the well below the surface.

Whatever the final judgment on the well's soundness, BP said the cap's installation was an important step for spill responders working to prepare for an expected busy hurricane season. The new cap can allow vessels on the surface collecting oil siphoned from the well to more quickly disconnect from the system and flee a storm. In that event, there would be a free flow of oil from the well. But if the cap can seal the well, spill responders can abandon the site knowing that oil could be contained. For the past several weeks, a more loosely fitting cap and containment vessels have managed to keep up to about 25,000 barrels of oil a day out of the Gulf. Federal officials estimate that between 35,000 and 60,000 barrels a day are gushing from the well.
