Bouquets, candles and handwritten notes piled up Sunday in public memorials across this city as residents struggled with the attack that killed six and wounded more than a dozen others, including Rep. Gabrielle Giffords.

The victims at the "Congress on Your Corner" event outside a Safeway supermarket Saturday included a federal judge who had just come from Mass and a 9-year-old girl who had recently been elected to her student council and wanted to see politics up close.

A young social worker, engaged to be married, was killed in the attack, as was a great-grandmother who stitched aprons to sell at church craft fairs and gathered her family around a huge turkey dinner each Christmas.

"I can't make sense of it," said B.J. Offutt, whose mother, 79-year-old Phyllis Schneck, was killed. Ms. Offutt believes her mother, an avid cook and crafts-maker who talked about the importance of border security, may have stopped by Ms. Giffords's event to hear the Democratic lawmaker discuss the issue.

This has been a rough year in Tucson, a city of nearly 550,000 tucked amid craggy mountain ranges about 60 miles north of the Mexican border. Violence flared in late summer and early fall, with police reporting at least 17 homicides in six weeks.

"I can't wrap my heart around this," said Mike Nowak of Saturday's killings.

He is the minister at Mountain Avenue Church of Christ, a modest building with a small kids' playroom in the back labeled "Dory's Room." It's named for Dorwan Stoddard, the church member who built it. Mr. Stoddard, who was 76, was killed in the rampage. His wife, Mavanell, was wounded. They were both in line to meet Ms. Giffords.

"I don't have the right Scripture. I have nothing for you," Mr. Nowak told his shattered congregation Sunday.

He had just spoken, he said, to Mr. Stoddard's widow, who had watched her husband die, talking to him as he drew his final breaths, though he was unable to respond.

Several members of the congregation stood to share their grief. Kat Joplin, 38, recalled how much the Stoddards helped her when she was homeless, finding her a job and getting her settled in a motel. "My heart is broken," Ms. Joplin said.

Memories flowed, too, at St. Odilia Catholic Church at a Mass in honor of another victim, Christina Taylor Green, a third-grader with a winning smile who sang in the Joyful Noise Choir.

Born on Sept. 11, 2001, Christina was featured in the book "Faces of Hope," about children with that birthday.

Her father, a scout for the Los Angeles Dodgers, told local media that Christina played second base in Little League and had been intrigued by politics for some time.

Christina was "a gentle, beautiful little girl," said Teresa Bier, the parish's director of religious education.

Ms. Giffords's public session, one of a series she has held over the years, was intended to let her talk with constituents one-on-one. Her staff at the event included Gabriel Zimmerman, a trained social worker who focused on helping those in need, including veterans and the mentally ill.

Mr. Zimmerman, who was 30, was among those slain. His mother, Emily Nottingham, described him as "a very happy and optimistic and very caring person."

Also killed was Dorothy Morris, a 76-year-old grandmother who spent several years traveling the country in a motor home with her husband, George, a former airline pilot. Mrs. Morris was killed at the scene. Mr. Morris was shot twice and remains hospitalized, said a family friend, Bill Royle.

The couple, high-school sweethearts, retired to Arizona in the mid-1990s and built their dream home in the mountains, Mr. Royle said.

The sixth fatality was U.S. Judge John M. Roll, who had stopped by the event to talk with Rep. Giffords.

The grief extended beyond Tucson. At a concert Saturday night, the Phoenix Symphony added to the program a somber selection from Edward Elgar's Enigma Variations to honor the victims.

Music director Michael Christie asked the audience for silence after the piece, instead of applause. As the final notes died, the hall fell quiet, but for the sound of weeping.