President Barack Obama ordered the withdrawal of 10,000 troops from Afghanistan this year, leaving the bulk of U.S. forces in place into the summer of 2012, when fighting is fiercest, but also signaling the beginning of the end of America's role in the 10-year war.

The announcement pleased neither Democrats in Congress who wanted a faster end to the costly and increasingly unpopular conflict, nor the Republicans and defense officials who had pushed hard to keep more troops in the fight for longer.

Mr. Obama faces reelection in November 2012, and some critics said the timeline he set for pulling out 33,000 surge troops -- leaving about 70,000 troops in the country -- was influenced by politics, a charge the White House strongly denied.

In his 13-minute televised address from the White House Wednesday evening, Mr. Obama said the pullout was justified by military gains against the Taliban insurgency and successful counter-terrorism strikes that have put al Qaeda "on a path to defeat" following the killing of Osama bin Laden last month.

"We are starting this drawdown from a position of strength. Al Qaeda is under more pressure than at any time since 9/11," Mr. Obama said. "Of course, huge challenges remain. This is the beginning -- but not the end -- of our effort to wind down this war."

Mr. Obama gave Gen. David Petraeus, the commander of U.S. and allied forces in Afghanistan, leeway to determine how quickly to pull out the 10,000 troops this year, allowing him to delay major force reductions until after the current summer fighting season, when the Taliban is most active, a senior military official said.

Mr. Obama said all of the remaining 33,000 surge forces that began arriving in January 2010 would depart Afghanistan "by next summer." Officials said that meant the last of those troops would head for home between August and late September.

In an unusually blunt rebuke from a fellow Democrat, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) said of Mr. Obama's decision: "It has been the hope of many in Congress and across the country that the full drawdown of U.S. forces would happen sooner than the president laid out -- and we will continue to press for a better outcome."

House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) said troop levels should be based on conditions on the ground. "Congress will hold the administration accountable for ensuring that the pace and scope of the drawdown does not undermine the progress we've made thus far," he said.

Administration officials said the risk of al Qaeda again using Afghanistan as a base for attacks against the U.S. or its allies was low, removing one of the main justifications for a large troop presence. "We don't see a transnational threat coming out of Afghanistan," one senior administration official said.

But Mr. Obama also signaled the U.S. drone campaign against militants in Pakistan would continue and said he would press Islamabad to step up its own efforts.

"There should be no doubt that so long as I am President, the United States will never tolerate a safe-haven for those who aim to kill us: they cannot elude us, nor escape the justice they deserve," he said.

War costs figured centrally in Mr. Obama's decision. The U.S. spends an estimated $1 million a year for each service member in Afghanistan. The conflict has left more than 1,600 Americans dead and cost U.S. taxpayers nearly $500 billion since 2001.

"America, it is time to focus on nation building here at home," Mr. Obama said, underlining concerns about the weak U.S. economy.

Mr. Obama's decision to withdraw 10,000 troops this year was based on recommendations he received from Gen. Petraeus and other advisers. According to officials, Gen. Petraeus presented a total of three options to the president, and, along with departing Defense Secretary Robert Gates, urged Mr. Obama to keep the final surge troops in the country until late in the fall of 2012. That would have allowed them to keep fighting until the cold weather brought combat to a natural lull.

Defense officials said the military would find ways to bring sufficient combat power to bear on the Taliban as long as possible under Mr. Obama's withdrawal plan. But some defense officials complained that Mr. Obama's end-of-summer deadline was driven more by the political calendar than the exigencies of war.

To get all surge troops out by the end of next summer, the military will have to start pulling them out in August, officials said. "We will lose at least two months of the fighting season," said a defense official.

Commanders had argued for a slow withdrawal of the surge troops to give the military more time to cement recent security gains in Helmand and Kandahar provinces, in the Taliban heartland of southern Afghanistan.

The drawdown from Afghanistan is similar in some ways to the pullout from Iraq. U.S. troops in Iraq peaked at around 171,000 during the 2007 surge, and have since dropped to under 50,000. The U.S. is scheduled to complete the withdrawal in December but could keep some forces in the country at the request of the Iraqi government. The Iraq war has cost more than $800 billion since its start in 2003.

When Mr. Obama announced the surge of 33,000 troops in December 2009, he promised to begin removing them from Afghanistan in July 2011. He said on Wednesday the drawdown would continue at a "steady pace" through the end of 2014, when Afghan forces are slated to assume responsibility for security.

The U.S. is eager to make sure the drawdown announcement wouldn't lead to a rush to the exits by its allies in Afghanistan.

Ahead of Mr. Obama's announcement, the U.K. said that around 200 of an expected 425 personnel Britain plans to remove from the country this year have already left.

British officials are considering a more substantial pullout. The U.K. provides the second-largest troop contingent in Afghanistan, with some 9,500 troops in country.