President Barack Obama laid out a sweeping vision of a U.S. newly committed to Asia and the Pacific, promising to ramp up American economic and military engagement despite the federal budget problems confronting him back in Washington.

In his first trip as president to Australia, Mr. Obama said U.S. Marines would be stationed permanently on Australia's north coast beginning next year, a gesture to Southeast Asian nations looking to U.S. authority to counter China's influence in the region.

"The United States is a Pacific power, and we are here to stay," he said Thursday in remarks to the Australian Parliament.

Mr. Obama vowed to address a wide range of issues confronting the region, including the territorial disputes engulfing the South China Sea, an issue that has emerged as an important subtext of his weeklong Asian trip.

U.S. officials back countries that dispute China's claims to the resource-laden sea, and the president described the conflict as a "shared challenge," along with maritime security and proliferation of weapons.

The Chinese government doesn't want the South China Sea issue to be raised during the East Asian Summit later this week in Bali, but the Obama administration has made it clear it intends to air the issue.

"The U.S. is standing up for norms like freedom of navigation that other nations support," said Ben Rhodes, a deputy national security adviser to Mr. Obama.

Mr. Obama said he had directed his national-security team to make the U.S. mission in the Asia-Pacific region a "top priority" as the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan wind down and vowed to allocate resources necessary to maintain a strong military presence in the region, while preserving America's "unique ability to project power and deter threats to peace."

"Reductions in U.S. defense spending will not -- I repeat, will not -- come at the expense of the Asia Pacific," he said in his speech to Parliament, reiterating a pledge first made last month by Defense Secretary Leon Panetta.

The White House wasn't specific about how the president would prioritize the region in future budgeting.

It was unclear, for instance, whether the region would see increased spending, flat funding or reductions that are simply less severe than those planned elsewhere.

Overall, the Pentagon is preparing $450 billion in spending cuts over the next decade, and faces cuts twice that amount if a congressional committee fails to come up with a deficit-reduction plan and automatic cuts are triggered.

The speech culminated months of signals by senior administration officials that Washington is turning more of its attention toward the Asia-Pacific region as the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan wind down.

Mr. Obama said he had made a "deliberate and strategic decision" to focus on the region.

"As a Pacific nation, the United States will play a larger and long-term role in shaping this region and its future, by upholding core principles and in close partnership with allies and friends," he said.

His vision for U.S. leadership included economic engagement as well, and the president said the U.S. would press all nations to abide international rules to promote free and fair trade. In a clear shot toward China, he said currencies must be market-driven, "so no nation has an unfair advantage."

Mr. Obama's whirlwind trip was to have him in the country for just about 27 hours.