Al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden, a mastermind of the largest terrorist attack in American history, was killed Sunday in Pakistan in a military operation after the U.S. learned of his location.

The death capped a manhunt of a decade for the architect of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks that left nearly 3,000 people dead and dramatically altered U.S. foreign policy and the nation's sense of security.

"Justice has been done," President Barack Obama said from the White House, where he made the dramatic announcement late Sunday. "The United States has conducted an operation that killed Osama bin Laden, the leader of al Qaeda and a terrorist who is responsible for the murder of thousands of men, women and children."

He said that he had ordered the attack earlier in the day after it became clear last week that there was sufficient intelligence, following a lead about his whereabouts that first surfaced in August. He said the U.S. has Mr. bin Laden's body in its possession.

Hundreds of onlookers gathered outside the White House -- and at Ground Zero in New York City, where the twin towers of the World Trade Center once stood -- to mark the moment. Frank Cantwell, a 64-year-old operating engineer at the construction site there, said there were only a few people present when the news first broke. "It's long overdue," he said. "You can sort of hear the silent cheers of 3,000 ghosts."

The elusive al Qaeda leader was killed in a targeted assault in the Pakistani city of Abbottabad, roughly 40 miles outside the capital city of Islamabad. The raid was conducted by a small helicopter-borne strike team, a senior U.S. administration official said. The team was on the compound for under 40 minutes, the official said.

In addition to Mr. bin Laden, three men were killed in the raid. The U.S. believes that two of them were the couriers and the third was Mr. bin Laden's adult son. A woman was also killed during the raid when she was used as a "shield" by one of the men in the compound. Two other women were injured.

During the raid, one of the U.S. helicopters malfunctioned and went down. The helicopter was destroyed by the crew and the assault force and crew members left the compound in a second helicopter, the senior administration official said.

Omar Khan, a local resident in the area of the attack, said American and Pakistani commandos landed in the area at 1:10 a.m., local time, and raided a house. "The entire area was rocked with a massive explosion," he said. "A massive exchange of firing took place which continued for more than half an hour." Security forces have cordoned off the area.

Mr. bin Laden's death is a major milestone for the U.S., but its precise effects on the battle against terrorism are unclear. Although Mr. bin Laden is the inspirational leader of al Qaeda and its offshoots around the world, he isn't thought to be a critical operational leader of the organization. Increasingly, terrorist actions have been undertaken by offshoots of his organization.

Still, Mr. bin Laden remained the worldwide symbol of the terrorist network and militant Islam more broadly. His death will be a major blow to al Qaeda, and one that makes the organization look less powerful.

"Taliban fighters have an admiration for Osama. It will affect their morale" and trigger retaliatory attacks, a Taliban commander in Paktia province in Afghanistan said in a phone interview.

The Associated Press said late Sunday that the U.S. had put its embassies on alert and was warning Americans of possible reprisal attacks following Mr. bin Laden's death.

Mr. Obama said he was first briefed on a possible lead on Mr. bin Laden's whereabouts last August. "It was far from certain, and it took many months to run this thread to ground," Mr. Obama said in his address to the nation Sunday night.

Mr. Obama said he met repeatedly with his national security team "as we developed more information about the possibility that we have located bin Laden hiding within a compound deep inside Pakistan."

Last week, there was enough intelligence to take action. On Sunday, he ordered what he described as a targeted operation against a compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan. No Americans were hurt in the raid, Mr. Obama said, and the team took pains to avoid civilian casualties. Mr. Obama stressed that Pakistan's help was critical to developing intelligence on his location.

Mr. Obama called his predecessors in office, George W. Bush and Bill Clinton, before speaking to the nation, a senior administration official said.

Because Mr. bin Laden was such an elusive figure, his death is a significant achievement for President Obama, who demanded an aggressive expansion of Predator strikes in Pakistan and pushed for expanded special operations training in that country as well.

The strike also has the potential to make already tense relations with Pakistan even more strained. Having vastly ramped up intelligence efforts on the ground and from the air in Pakistan, the U.S. carries out the strikes with little input from the Pakistanis.

The CIA has launched more than 200 drone strikes since it was ramped up in 2008. The bulk of those strikes have been launched under President Obama, who was an early convert to the covert program, which has killed 1,200 militants.

In recent months relations with Pakistan have grown tense, but the drone program has continued. CIA director Leon Panetta met on April 11 with Pakistan's intelligence chief Ahmad Shuja Pasha, and continued to receive private agreement allowing the U.S. to launch drone strikes.

After the news of Mr. bin Laden's death became public, Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari called an emergency meeting and security around Islamabad was tightened.

There was a mix of somberness of and celebration near Ground Zero, where a new tower is rapidly becoming part of the city's skyline. Cheers rang out and horns honked, while others lit candles at a memorial at the site.

Mayor Michael Bloomberg said in a statement, "New Yorkers have waited nearly 10 years for this news. It is my hope that it will bring some closure and comfort to all those who lost loved ones on Sept. 11, 2001."

Jane Pollicino of Plainview, N.Y., whose husband, Steve, died in the attack on the World Trade Center, said, "It makes it all real again. You carry on day by day, hoping that the government is trying to get this person. But it has been 10 years. "You get a sense of relief," she said, her voice shaking. "But it brings it all back to the surface."