The new $120 million Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial, dedicated by President Barack Obama on Sunday, is situated at the northwestern corner of the Tidal Basin in this capital's monumental core. Its success or failure depends on its centerpiece, a colossal portrait of the slain civil-rights leader, rendered in three-quarter relief. The work of Lei Yixin, a member in good standing of China's official monuments industry, the portrait was conceived for monumental effect. Sad to say, it's merely big.

The sculptural portrait is set within a four-acre King Memorial precinct that runs in a long arc alongside the basin, with the arc bisected by an entry axis roughly aligned with the intersection of Independence Avenue and West Basin Drive. The precinct slopes gently down toward the water. Its long, massive perimeter berms, which tilt upward from the avenue and the drive, respectively, jut into the two sundered portions of a beige-tinted granite mass, the Mountain of Despair, which are themselves aligned with the entry axis. The Stone of Hope, which bears the portrait of King and exceeds 30 feet in height, is designed to appear as if it had been cut out of the Mountain. It stands 50 feet closer to the water's edge.

The symbolism draws on King's 1963 "I Have a Dream" speech at the Lincoln Memorial in which he said, "With this faith we will be able to hew out of a mountain of despair a stone of hope." It was a core element of the competition-winning design produced a decade ago by the Roma Design Group of San Francisco, although the memorial as built is a much-modified version of the original concept. The Martin Luther King Jr. National Memorial Project Foundation retained Mr. Lei to create the Mountain, Stone and relief portrait.

Also facing the Tidal Basin is a 450-foot-long "inscription wall" of gray-green granite that doubles as a retaining wall for the berms. There are narrow waterfalls where it meets the Mountain masses while, like Maya Lin's nearby Vietnam Veterans Memorial wall, the inscription wall decreases in height as distance from the Mountain increases.

The King Memorial is interspersed with several large landscaped pods planted with saplings (mainly the familiar Japanese cherries) along with shrubs, turf and flowers. These pods are girded with granite borders of varying heights that serve as benches. Mountain and Stone will thus be largely screened from Independence Avenue, along which new elms have been planted as well.

The entrance to the memorial's berm-flanked forecourt is from West Basin Drive, and from there you pass between the smooth inner faces of the Mountain masses. The outer faces of the Stone lying ahead are likewise finished, so it reads unmistakably as a mass "hewn" out of the Mountain. It has also been moved out of alignment with the gap in the Mountain and turned so the King portrait faces the Jefferson Memorial across the Tidal Basin. This is an intentional reference to King's description of the Declaration of Independence in his 1963 speech as a "promissory note" on which "America has defaulted . . . insofar as her citizens of color are concerned."

To be sure, the King relief looms large when you stand in front of it. Mr. Lei has rendered the civil-rights leader in a rigid, frontal pose, with his legs slightly parted. He is wearing a suit and tie and has his arms crossed and his head turned slightly to his right. But the King figure presents us with a disquieting collage of clumsy forms. The legs emerging from the Stone are treated as a pair of rectilinear planes forming a vertical crease. The jacket is more fully modeled, but its lower hem is absurdly thick. King's clothed torso consists of broad, crudely simplistic planes that convey little of the underlying anatomic structure. Moreover, he looks rather squat because the breadth of his shoulders is exaggerated while his neck is scarcely visible.

Mr. Lei has failed to capture King's facial features, starting with the eyes. Instead, the face consists of reductively rotund or -- as with the lips, nostrils and slightly cleft chin -- positively bulbous shapes. King wears a pensive, grave expression. It was softened at the insistence of the Commission of Fine Arts, which did not want a confrontational figure. But if you don't achieve a vivid likeness, a vivid characterization is hard to come by. Overall, the portrait doesn't resolve into a resonant whole. Far from defining King as a man -- or as the dominant figure in America's civil-rights movement -- it barely resembles him. And without a successful portrait, you don't have much of a monument.

Complaints have arisen that a quote on the Stone of Hope -- "I was a drum major for justice, peace and righteousness" -- is an inept paraphrase that makes King sound egotistical. Certainly the inscription-wall quotations should have focused exclusively on his crusade against Jim Crow, which is the reason he has a memorial near Thomas Jefferson's, Franklin Delano Roosevelt's and Abraham Lincoln's. Instead, the inscriptions digress into King's opposition to the Vietnam War, along with expressions of internationalist sentiment worthy of any number of forgettable United Nations functionaries. Example: "Every nation must now develop an overriding loyalty to mankind as a whole in order to preserve the best in their individual societies."

And despite the intended relationship between the Stone and the Jefferson Memorial, reciprocal views between the King and Jefferson memorials hardly enhance the former's stature. John Russell Pope's great temple -- a structure many times larger than the Mountain and Stone -- reads beautifully from the King Memorial. But from the Jefferson, the Mountain and Stone are a smallish, rather lumpen assemblage, diminished in this vast setting by the multitude of tall trees looming in the background as well as the Lincoln Memorial and office buildings in Rosslyn, Va., across the Potomac. It's as if this important view of the King Memorial wasn't even considered during the design process.

Even when viewed from the King Memorial forecourt, the Mountain masses are unimposing. It's the adjoining berms whose large scale registers. Partly on this account, and partly because of the overly schematic treatment of the memorial's quasigeological elements, the translation of King's mountain/stone figure of speech into three-dimensional form, like the relief portrait, is unconvincing. In short, monumental intentions have gone unfulfilled at the King Memorial.