Intel Corp. used President Obama's visit to disclose plans to build a $5 billion chip factory in Arizona and hire 4,000 workers, moves that dovetail with the administration's job-creation agenda.

The move, made by Intel Chief Executive Paul Otellini as the president toured Intel's operations in Oregon, is the latest investment by the Silicon Valley giant to help boost the output and performance of its chips.

President Obama's trip west to meet with high-tech leaders comes amid a looming budget fight in Washington and corporate opposition to some of the president's policies.

On Thursday, Mr. Obama had a dinner near San Francisco with a dozen high-tech CEOs, including Apple Inc.'s Steve Jobs, Facebook Inc.'s Mark Zuckerberg, Google Inc.'s Eric Schmidt and Oracle Corp.'s Larry Ellison. The White House said topics included research and exports, and the president's incentives for companies to grow and hire.

Mr. Otellini hasn't been shy about criticizing the administration; Intel has expressed concerns about the high cost of doing business in the U.S. and the possible impact of proposed greenhouse gas regulation.

Yet the White House on Friday said Mr. Otellini will join the President's Council on Jobs and Competitiveness. And on Friday Intel's chief echoed many of the president's recent statements about the need to rebuild U.S. competitiveness against foreign rivals and invest in research, manufacturing and education.

"The best way forward for us is to unleash the unmatched creative energies of the people of this country to transform our manufacturing base," Mr. Otellini said. "Intel is proud to do its part."

As Mr. Otellini spoke, a screen behind him shimmered with alternating slogans that included "Intel, Made in America," "Invented in America" and "Designed in America."

The Santa Clara, Calif., company stresses it sells most of its chips abroad but fabricates most of them in America. Mr. Otellini and his predecessors have been vocal about the need for a better-educated U.S. workforce, a theme the president amplified.

"Many of the jobs that are going to exist in the future, that exist now -- like the ones here at Intel -- require proficiency in math and science," Mr. Obama said. "And yet today as many as a quarter of our students aren't even finishing high school."

Intel had signaled a new factory was needed, and in mid-January boosted its capital spending forecast for 2011 to $9 billion from $5.2 billion in 2010.

Chandler, Ariz., is already home to one of the company's biggest production sites. The new project will lead to thousands of construction and permanent manufacturing jobs, Intel said. Construction is expected to begin this year and be completed in 2013, Intel said.