The White House is seeking to use China to try to establish a more productive relationship with North Korea's new leader, Kim Jong Eun, with President Barack Obama asking Chinese President Hu Jintao to take a sharper approach with Pyongyang.

U.S. officials said their initial efforts were encouraging because Mr. Hu told Mr. Obama on Monday that China is frustrated with North Korea's new leadership and indicated Beijing may use its influence with Pyongyang to more strongly press its ally to scrap plans for a mid-April satellite launch.

China didn't confirm the U.S. characterization of the 90-minute meeting, which took place on the sidelines of a nuclear-security summit

Ben Rhodes, a U.S. deputy national-security adviser, said Mr. Hu conveyed to Mr. Obama that the Chinese "share the frustration with the choices that North Korea has made." The Chinese delegation gave the impression Beijing wants to work with the U.S. and its allies, he said.

It remains unclear what pressure the Chinese might apply on Pyongyang, if any. China's Foreign Ministry spokesman declined to comment on what Messrs. Hu and Obama talked about. The Chinese delegation in Seoul referred to China's state-run news agency Xinhua for reports on the event.

Xinhua's report didn't refer to the satellite launch directly. It said Mr. Hu said at the meeting that China hopes the U.S. and North Korea "will keep contacts and dialogue and honor the consensus reached between them, so as to improve their relations."

Mr. Obama has sharpened his tone with North Korea in recent days, a shift prompted by the new government's plans for the satellite launch, which the U.S. believes is intended as a test firing of a missile.

While Beijing has warned of "concerns" over the rocket-launch plans, it remains reluctant to press it too far, worried about the effects of a potential collapse of the North's regime.

Mr. Rhodes said the Chinese agree with the U.S. that a North Korean satellite launch would be destabilizing for the region and will continue discussions with Pyongyang over the coming weeks. But he also cautioned that the administration is waiting to see how these discussions unfold.

The U.S. has said a launch would likely scuttle a recent deal that included food aid for North Korea. Days after the agreement Pyongyang announced the launch plans, an embarrassment for the Obama administration, which had been resistant to directly engage North Korea because of its history of reneging on agreements.