The Justice Department said Sunday it would weigh whether to file federal criminal charges against George Zimmerman after his acquittal in a shooting that set off a searing national debate over racial justice and self-defense laws.

Its statement came as groups including the NAACP and the American Civil Liberties Union urged U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder to open a federal civil-rights case against Mr. Zimmerman, the former neighborhood-watch captain who shot and killed Trayvon Martin.

"Experienced federal prosecutors will determine whether the evidence reveals a prosecutable violation" of civil-rights laws, a department spokeswoman said in a statement. The department has had an open investigation into the death of Mr. Martin since last year.

Mr. Zimmerman, a 29-year-old Hispanic, faced second-degree murder and manslaughter charges for shooting Mr. Martin, a 17-year-old African-American, in a gated community here in February 2012. Prosecutors argued that Mr. Zimmerman profiled the teen as a criminal, pursued him and provoked the deadly confrontation. Defense lawyers said Mr. Zimmerman was attacked by Mr. Martin and fired at him in self-defense.

The initial six-week delay in arresting Mr. Zimmerman triggered nationwide protests and accusations of racial injustice.

The NAACP and other groups blasted Saturday's not-guilty verdict as a miscarriage of justice.

"Those of us who are fathers, particularly of African-American boys, find it shockingly frightening," said Hilary Shelton, director of the NAACP's Washington bureau. The message, he said, is, "Not only can we do this, we can get away with it."

Yet legal experts question whether such a case will be filed, given the high burden of proof prosecutors would face. They would likely have to show Mr. Zimmerman was motivated by racial hatred when he shot Mr. Martin, said Paul Callan, an attorney at Callan, Koster, Brady & Brennan LLP in New York.

"I think you could make out the case that unconscious racism caused Mr. Zimmerman to profile" Mr. Martin, said Kenneth Nunn, assistant director of the Criminal Justice Center at the University of Florida's Levin College of Law. "But there doesn't seem to be enough there to justify a claim that racial animus was the predicate behind Trayvon Martin's death."

Attorneys for Mr. Martin's family said they are considering filing a civil lawsuit against Mr. Zimmerman, though they haven't made a decision. "We're still trying to make sense of the verdict in the criminal case," said Benjamin Crump, a lawyer for the family. "We'll be talking about our options going forward in the coming days."

Such a case would face high hurdles, legal observers say. Mr. Zimmerman can seek immunity from civil lawsuits under Florida's so-called Stand Your Ground law -- something his attorney said he planned to do. "In effect, there will be no civil suits," said Tamara Lave, a University of Miami law professor. "If there is a civil suit filed, it will be dismissed, and future ones will be barred."

In the verdict's aftermath, protests erupted in cities across the country, from San Francisco to Sanford. Nearly all were peaceful, though a demonstration in Oakland resulted in some vandalism, according to a spokesman for the city's police department.

President Barack Obama on Sunday said "a jury has spoken" and asked the public to respect the Martin family's "call for calm reflection." He added, "I know this case has elicited strong passions. And in the wake of the verdict, I know those passions may be running even higher."

The buildup to Mr. Zimmerman's murder trial featured extensive commentary about the roles that race and Florida's controversial 2005 Stand Your Ground law played in the case. In the end, however, neither figured much in the courtroom battle.

Mr. Zimmerman's attorneys prevailed without relying on the provisions of the "Stand Your Ground" gun-rights law, which eliminates the duty for a person to retreat in the face of danger before using lethal force. Under the measure, they had the option of seeking a court ruling, before any trial, that Mr. Zimmerman acted legally. But instead, his lawyers mounted a traditional self-defense case -- one that legal analysts say benefited from missteps by police and the prosecution.

Police investigators made mistakes including failing to preserve the crime scene or to widely canvass the neighborhood to interview witnesses in timely fashion, Ms. Lave said. Prosecutors were left "working with one hand tied behind their back," she said.

A Sanford Police Department spokesman declined to comment. Former Sanford police chief Bill Lee, who was forced out amid the furor over Mr. Martin's case, has previously defended the integrity of the officers' investigation and said the department lacked probable cause to arrest Mr. Zimmerman.

Prosecutors made missteps as well, Ms. Lave said. Among them: introducing Mr. Zimmerman's statements to police into evidence. Their aim was to point out inconsistencies in his accounts. But the move allowed Mr. Zimmerman's lawyers to avoid calling him to the stand and subjecting him to cross-examination.

At a news conference Saturday night, state attorney Angela Corey defended her office's handling of the case. She said the case presented several challenges, including that the fatal encounter occurred in a public space, where both individuals had a right to be, rather than a dwelling.

The issue of race, which infused so much of the public debate over the case, rarely entered the courtroom discussion. Circuit Judge Debra Nelson barred prosecutors from saying Mr. Zimmerman racially profiled Mr. Martin. The topic mostly remained unspoken, such as when jurors heard phone calls Mr. Zimmerman placed to police to report suspicious people, all of whom were black.

Yet race could have been a factor in the jury's verdict, Ms. Lave said. The six female jurors were all white, except one who was Hispanic. "You want to have people of color on your jury because sometimes their experience with police is something that white people don't have," she said.