Former President George W. Bush, dedicating the library and museum that will house his presidential records, said Thursday he stayed true to his core convictions during his time in the White House by lowering taxes, raising school standards and leaving foreign countries "liberated" from dictators.

During the dedication of the George W. Bush Presidential Center on the campus of Southern Methodist University, speakers highlighted the 43rd president's "resolve" in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, his work in Africa and his good humor, with only passing references to the controversial decisions that marked his two terms in office.

Mr. Bush said that as president, his deepest-held conviction was that America must strive to expand the reach of freedom.

"One of the benefits of freedom is that people can disagree," Mr. Bush said, adding that he created plenty of opportunities for people to exercise that right.

The library's opening has prompted an examination of Mr. Bush's administration, with allies saying that many of the Republican's actions would be viewed more objectively and positively over time.

Americans' view of Mr. Bush has been improving. In a Wall Street Journal/NBC poll this month, 35% had a positive view of him, up from 31% in January 2009, the month he left office. That compares with 47% who view President Barack Obama positively. The proportion holding a negative view of Mr. Bush declined sharply, to 44% in this month's poll from 58% in 2009.

Andrew Card, who served as Mr. Bush's chief of staff, said the museum provides context for challenges the former president confronted.

"This is really not a tribute to George W. Bush," he said in an interview. "It's trying to put people in the position of being president and facing some phenomenally difficult decisions."

The library invites debate and discussion, with an interactive exhibit that lets visitors walk through key decisions Mr. Bush faced -- including on the Iraq war, Hurricane Katrina and the financial crisis -- and then weigh in with what they would do.

Thursday's library dedication was the rare occasion that brought together all five living U.S. presidents: Mr. Bush; his father, George H.W. Bush; and Democrats Bill Clinton, Jimmy Carter and Mr. Obama.

These five presidents had gathered only once before, at the White House in 2009 after Mr. Obama was elected. Their relationships are complicated, but on Thursday, they highlighted the positive.

Mr. Obama noted that they belong to an exclusive fraternity, adding that "our club is more like a support group."

He has been among Mr. Bush's most vocal and persistent critics, blaming his predecessor's policies for exacerbating the financial crisis. But on Thursday, he praised Mr. Bush's willingness to reach across the aisle and his work to rewrite immigration laws -- an effort that Mr. Obama vowed to complete.

The focus on Mr. Bush's legacy comes as speculation intensifies about the possibility of another Bush presidential bid.

On Wednesday, Jeb Bush spoke in Dallas, sounding very much like a candidate as he laid out his ideas about immigration and education. His son, George P. Bush, introduced him, touting the former Florida governor's approval ratings.

But on Thursday, former first lady Barbara Bush suggested on NBC's "Today" show that her son shouldn't run. "We've had enough Bushes," she said.

George W. Bush disagreed in an interview with ABC News, saying that his counsel to his brother was simple: "Run."