President Barack Obama on Wednesday will start a push for the most sweeping changes to gun laws in nearly two decades, testing whether lawmakers, including powerful members of his own party, are willing to ban the most controversial weapons and toughen requirements for prospective owners.

Flanked by children who wrote him in the aftermath of the deadly shooting spree last month at a Connecticut elementary school, Mr. Obama will call for Congress to end the sale of certain semiautomatic rifles and high-capacity ammunition magazines, and to require background checks to screen gun buyers for criminal violations and serious mental illness, people briefed on his plans said.

His proposals will also include actions that Mr. Obama can take by using his executive powers, such as more aggressive prosecution of those who try to buy firearms illegally.

White House officials have signaled that Mr. Obama is likely to propose ideas that haven't been widely discussed in public, such as a plan to encourage target shooters to lock up their guns at target ranges rather than keep them at home, where they may be more likely to fall into the wrong hands. Mr. Obama will also move to clear the way for new federal research on gun-related injuries.

Gun control has emerged as an unexpected and urgent addition to the president's agenda, overshadowing, at least temporarily, immigration and other issues that were thought to be the first priorities of his second term. In the month since the shootings in Sandy Hook, Conn., which killed 20 children and seven adults, Mr. Obama has mobilized Vice President Joe Biden, several cabinet members and other administration officials to study gun-control measures, mental-health issues, violence in videogames and more. After meeting with dozens of groups on both sides of the gun debate, Mr. Biden delivered a long list of recommendations to the president on Monday.

Administration officials said that Mr. Obama reviewed the vice president's ideas before settling on a strategy. "The president will announce a plan that is the president's plan," White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said.

National Rifle Association officials already have predicted that efforts to ban high-capacity magazines and a group of semiautomatic rifles often called assault weapons would go nowhere in Congress. And lawmakers have made clear that many, if not all, of the president's recommendations will face stiff opposition.

Congress has done little in the realm of gun-control since 1994, when a crime bill that included a ban on some semiautomatic rifles was enacted. That ban expired in 2004.

Now, almost two decades since Congress took on many of these issues, Mr. Obama will run up against a powerful gun lobby and resistance from some members of his own party. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada has said that he didn't believe a ban on some weapons could pass the House, and that he wasn't confident it would pass the Senate.

The legislative path for these proposals is expected to start in the Senate, where Democrats hold the majority. While some Republicans have signaled willingness to discuss gun-control measures, others have appeared unmoved on the issue.

On Tuesday, Rep. Steve Stockman (R., Texas) released a statement saying the president's plan to use executive action to address gun violence would be an unconstitutional attack on U.S. founding principles. He said he would consider eliminating funding for implementation of Mr. Obama's proposals, or even seek the impeachment of the president, to thwart this effort.

Gun-rights groups are preparing for a fight. NRA officials called a meeting last week with Mr. Biden an attack on the Second Amendment. Several gun groups have made clear that they see little they like in the expected recommendations.

Mike Hammond, legislative counsel to Gun Owners of America, said his organization would oppose every idea that has been discussed by the administration thus far. "It's all bad," he said. "It all has to be stopped."

Still, some elements of Mr. Obama's expected plan could draw broad support, including efforts to strengthen measures to keep guns from mentally ill people considered to be a danger to themselves or others.

Rep. Chaka Fattah (D., Pa.) said one element would aim to intervene more effectively in cases of mental illness. "In each of these mass-shooting instances, there is every reason to believe that a more robust intervention might have been able" to prevent deaths, he said. The aim, he said, is to find ways to "intervene prior to them walking into the movie theater or school."

In addition, some advocates and opponents of tougher gun laws agree that the existing system for screening gun buyers has holes, because some states and federal agencies aren't diligent about adding to databases the mental-health and criminal records of people who are disqualified from buying firearms. Efforts to push states and agencies to contribute records more speedily could draw support.

Mr. Obama is likely to have a tougher challenge in trying to extend background checks to all gun purchases. Currently, buyers are screened only when they buy from a federally licensed dealer. Mr. Obama wants to extend those checks to all sales, including from nonlicensed sellers at gun shows and from sales among individual buyers and sellers. The NRA on Tuesday declined to comment on expanding background checks to all sales.

Mr. Obama will also press to install a director for the agency that most enforces gun laws, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, a person briefed on his plans said. The agency hasn't had a permanent director since 2006. But it was unclear if Mr. Obama would name a new nominee and push lawmakers for confirmation, or would take a more aggressive action, such as installing a new director temporarily through his powers to make appointments when Congress is in recess.

After the president unfurls his plans, the focus quickly will shift to Congress. While executive action will be a component of Mr. Obama's strategy, administration officials have acknowledged that they will need congressional approval for many of the most significant proposals.

House Democrats have created their own task force that plans to develop a separate set of gun-control recommendations. Mr. Biden met with task force members Monday, laying out the White House's thinking about reducing gun violence.

Rep. Jackie Speier (D., Calif.), who serves on the House task force, said the Obama administration had undertaken the most comprehensive review on guns in a generation. "Not only is this long overdue, but when we do take action, we do things that can be snuffed out," Ms. Speier said, noting the 1994 ban expired after 10 years.

Mr. Obama has said that changing the laws will be a steep challenge, but that difficult objectives still are worth pursuing, particularly if they could protect children's lives.

The White House's Mr. Carney said that while the president wants to move quickly, the timetable for many proposals will be Congress's prerogative.