President Vladimir Putin moved to pull Ukraine back from the brink of breakup Wednesday, calling on separatists to put off a secession vote, softening his attacks on a presidential election and saying his troops had withdrawn from the border.

Mr. Putin's change of tone came after weeks of escalation in the crisis over Ukraine, which has taken dozens of lives and brought East-West relations to their lowest point since the Cold War.

But Washington was dismissive and immediately questioned whether Moscow was genuinely committed to stabilizing Ukraine, where the government in Kiev is strongly pro-Western.

The Pentagon said it had seen no evidence to back Mr. Putin's claim that he had called back the tens of thousands of troops deployed to Ukraine's border last month.

The Obama administration noted Mr. Putin failed to call on the pro-Russian separatists to lay down their arms or vacate buildings they have commandeered in eastern Ukraine in the run-up to the referendum they plan to hold on Sunday.

Kiev and the West say such a vote would be illegal and should be canceled outright.

Mr. Putin, however, said after talks in the Kremlin with Swiss President Didier Burkhalter, who also is chairman of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, that their approaches "coincide to a large extent."

The outlines of the OSCE plan appear to include longtime Russian demands: that Kiev end its military operation and that the rebel leaders, whom Kiev denounces as terrorists, be given a prominent role in talks over a political settlement.

"Direct dialogue between the Kiev government and the representatives of southeast Ukraine is the crucial element for a resolution," Mr. Putin said.

Mr. Putin's appeal to the separatists to delay the referendum is the first time he has publicly called on them to do anything to reduce tensions. Separatist leaders reacted with dismay, with some calling it a betrayal, and said they would formulate their response Thursday.

But the referendum was facing increasingly uncertain prospects, failing to generate a groundswell of popular support.

Ukraine's military and police operation also has limited the ability of the separatists to consolidate their grip. Ukraine's intelligence service has said that in intercepted telephone conversations, rebels sound increasingly desperate for help from Russia to fight off the Ukrainian offensive.

Even some separatist leaders admitted that their initiative was looking hopeless.

Kirill Rudenko, a spokesman for the self-declared Donetsk People's Republic, said that while he wasn't reflecting the group's official position, he found it difficult to imagine how they could hold a referendum in the midst of Kiev's military campaign.

"In such circumstances, it won't be possible," he said.

Mr. Burkhalter said the OSCE would soon distribute a proposed "road map" for easing tensions in Ukraine, including a cease-fire, political dialogue and elections, and hold consultations in Kiev and Washington in the next few days.

Ukraine's Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk reiterated that it considered any referendum on secession illegal, and that negotiations with terrorists would be "impermissible and inconceivable."

Past diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis have failed, most notably a pact reached in Geneva last month among Ukraine, Russia, the European Union and the U.S. But they have served to buy time for Moscow and its allies in Ukraine to undermine Kiev's control over the country.

Russia also has sent conflicting signals on rescuing Ukraine's cash-strapped economy, dramatically raising the bill for natural gas while supporting a $17 billion rescue package from the International Monetary Fund.

The first installment of IMF loans arrived in Kiev on Wednesday, much of which is expected to go to pay debts owed to Gazprom, the Russian gas supplier.

The May 25 presidential vote is seen as vital for national reconciliation after former President Viktor Yanukovych, a Donetsk-area native and Kremlin ally, was toppled by pro-Western protesters in February.

Previously, Kremlin officials had dismissed the idea of conducting a presidential election amid the current tensions as absurd. But Mr. Putin seemed to soften Moscow's position.

He said new elections were "movement in the right direction, but they won't resolve anything if all the citizens of Ukraine don't understand that their rights will be guaranteed" afterward.

President Barack Obama has threatened to ramp up U.S. sanctions dramatically if Moscow disrupts the election.

European governments agreed Wednesday on a modest widening of their sanctions list in the coming days, according to diplomats in Brussels.

But a proposal that would have made it much easier for the bloc to target Russian firms has been put aside for now, they said.

One analyst said the increasing violence in the region probably had more to do with the change of rhetoric than Western sanctions.

"Given how [Mr. Putin] postured himself, as violence increases he comes under greater pressure to send in the troops," said Thomas Graham, a former Russia specialist at the U.S. National Security Council who is now senior director at Kissinger Associates Inc.

He added that the Kremlin seems to recognize that any military campaign in eastern Ukraine wouldn't be as bloodless as its takeover of Crimea, so Mr. Putin had to "find a way to de-escalate without looking like he is caving."

Senior U.S. officials said the Russian leader's latest comments were helpful, but that Washington still believed that the Kremlin was working to undermine the May 25 elections.

"There are still efforts under way to hinder the preparations," State Department spokeswoman Jennifer Psaki said. "There is far more that President Putin and the Russians can do to de-escalate the situation and to ensure safe elections."

The U.S. also said it had seen no change in Russian troop deployment.

"In order to believe President Putin's remarks that they are withdrawing troops from Ukraine's border we would actually have to see Russian troops withdraw," Pentagon spokesman Col. Steve Warren said.

Mr. Putin's comments came as Kiev freed one of the pro-Russian movement's top leaders and two other jailed separatists in exchange for three Ukrainian intelligence officers the rebels had been holding in Slovyansk, the city at the heart of the insurgency, since late April.

Mr. Putin welcomed the release of Pavel Gubarev and said "all other political prisoners" should be released too.

Ukraine's State Security Service said the armed forces had incurred 14 dead and 66 wounded so far in its operation to oust the pro-Russian militants.

There is no official count of losses among the separatists, though officials have said dozens have been killed.

Interfax quoted separatists as saying they were fighting on the outskirts of Slovyansk, attempting to retake road checkpoints and a television tower that had been taken by Ukrainian forces earlier in the week.

Ukrainian authorities didn't comment on the fighting. Officials said earlier that they were seeking to contain the separatist forces in Slovyansk, while trying to avoid civilian casualties.


