The U.S. and Cuba agreed to restore diplomatic ties after a half century of hostility, ending one of the world's last Cold War standoffs and launching a realignment of the politics of the Americas.

President Barack Obama and Raul Castro, in synchronized announcements Wednesday, said that their long-estranged countries would restart cooperation on a range of issues and reestablish an American embassy in Havana that closed in 1961 after the Cuban Revolution.

The leaders agreed to a series of landmark diplomatic steps after reaching a deal to free U.S. aid worker Alan Gross, who was imprisoned in Cuba for the past five years. The White House also agreed to return three Cuban agents jailed in the U.S. in exchange for Cuba's release of one unnamed American intelligence operative who had been held for nearly two decades.

The policy changes fall short of fully lifting the 54-year U.S. embargo against Cuba, which would require an act from Congress. But they forge significant economic ties between the two nations by allowing American financial institutions to open accounts with Cuban counterparts, easing restrictions on the export of U.S. agricultural and telecommunications gear to Cuba and permitting Americans to use credit and debit cards there. U.S. residents will be allowed to send up to $2,000 every three months to relatives on the island -- four times the current limit.

The new regulations will make it easier for Americans to travel to Cuba under the 12 categories of travel now allowed, which currently range from family visits to humanitarian projects and educational and sports activities -- and bring home more than $400 worth of goods, including a limited amount of Cuban cigars.

The Obama administration has also begun the process of removing the U.S. designation of Cuba as a state sponsor of terrorism.

The softening of U.S. relations with Cuba, a nation of 11 million just 90 miles off the coast of Florida, is the latest in a series of attempts by Mr. Obama to recalibrate American foreign policy as his time in office winds down. It secures a major legacy item for the president while setting up another pitched battle with lawmakers, including Republicans who next year will control both the House and Senate.

U.S. officials said they expected the two countries to continue to have strong differences, particularly on issues of democracy and human rights. But Washington and Havana can cooperate on issues such as migration, counterterrorism and battling Ebola, the officials said.

"Our emphasis on human rights will be just as strong and we believe more effective under this policy," a senior administration official said.

Mr. Obama said the policy changes mark the beginning of "a new chapter" for the Americas, and he urged Congress to bolster his executive actions by lifting the Cuba embargo.

"In the most significant changes in our policy in more than 50 years, we will end an outdated approach that, for decades, has failed to advance our interests, and instead we will begin to normalize relations between our two countries," Mr. Obama said from the White House.

"As these changes unfold, I look forward to engaging Congress in an honest and serious debate about lifting the embargo," Mr. Obama said.

"Neither the American, nor Cuban people are well served by a rigid policy that is rooted in events that took place before most of us were born," he added.

Mr. Castro, in his televised statement, said Cuba was open to dialogue with the U.S. on democracy and human rights, which U.S. officials said are still top concerns, but said Havana was seeking a total end to the U.S. economic embargo.

"This doesn't mean that the main issues have been resolved," Mr. Castro said.

The decision by Mr. Obama sets up another policy fight with lawmakers.

Critics such as Sen. Marco Rubio (R., Fla.), a Cuban-American who is expected to head a key subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, pledged Congress wouldn't lift the embargo with Cuba.

Congress's power of the purse may be opponents' best chance to block President Obama's efforts. Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.), who is expected to head an appropriations subcommittee with oversight of foreign operations, tweeted Wednesday he would "do all in my power to block the use of funds to open an embassy in Cuba. Normalizing relations with Cuba is a bad idea at a bad time."

In the first phone call between the leaders of the U.S. and Cuba since the revolution, Messrs. Obama and Castro discussed the planned policy changes on Tuesday.

That was the culmination of some 18 months of secret negotiations between senior U.S. and Cuban officials that were aided by the Canadian government and Pope Francis at the Vatican.

Many Cuban dissidents also welcomed the moves. Miriam Celaya, an independent journalist and dissident, said the moves will make it easier for dissidents to press for rights, since the government can no longer claim they are tools of a hostile government.

"I think it's the Cuban government which has been cornered," she said in a telephone interview.

Since taking over the reins of power from his elder brother, Mr. Castro has been stymied in the pace of reforms by Fidel, who most analysts say is still an influential conservative force. But the elder Castro is in fragile health, and Cuba is in precarious economic straits.

Raul Castro has said he will step down in 2018, possibly clearing the way for Miguel Diaz-Canel, the first vice president, who appears to be his favored successor.

Mr. Obama said Secretary of State John Kerry would lead the effort to re-establish relations. Mr. Kerry said he looked forward to becoming "the first secretary of state in 60 years to visit Cuba." He also said he was sending an envoy to Havana next month to pick up the talks of formally re-establishing diplomatic relations.

Mr. Obama wouldn't turn down an invitation to visit Cuba, White House press secretary Josh Earnest said.

The president's detente with Cuba, something he has pledged to pursue ever since his 2008 presidential campaign, could shake up the international order.

U.S. policy toward Cuba has been an increasing point of contention with other countries in the hemisphere. In Latin America, the administration said rapprochement with Cuba puts the U.S. in alignment with its closest regional allies, who have lobbied for years for a lifting of the economic embargo on Havana.

These officials also said it would counter the ability of regional leaders to cite U.S. foreign policy as the rationale for pursuing repressive policies and keeping their economies closed.

"This takes the United States out of the equation," said Peter Schechter, a director at the Atlantic Council, a Washington think tank, and a Latin America expert.

Mr. Obama said he was "convinced that through a policy of engagement, we can more effectively stand up for our values and help the Cuban people help themselves as they move into the 21st century."

U.S. officials and Latin American experts said normalization with Cuba could significantly impact other regional countries traditionally hostile to the U.S., such as Venezuela.

Caracas is facing an economic crisis due to the recent plunge of oil prices. Analysts say the possibility of losing Venezuelan aid likely played a role in Cuba reaching agreement with the U.S. As a result of the deal, Venezuela could lose a major partner in its efforts to galvanize regional opposition to U.S. policies.

Russian President Vladimir Putin is expected to be particularly wary of Washington's rapprochement with Havana.

Cuba has long been the Kremlin's closest ally in the Northern Hemisphere, and Mr. Putin isn't seen as willing to easily lose his preferential ties to the Caribbean country.

U.S. officials also hope renewed relations with Cuba will aid the White House's efforts to forge an agreement with Iran limiting its nuclear program by convincing Tehran that the U.S. is serious about a deal.

Despite some lawmakers' outcry, senior administration officials said they hoped the new policy would help build support for legislative action to further erode the embargo. "We believe that the utility of these policy changes will become evident and will hopefully create greater momentum for legislative action going forward," an administration official said.

One unresolved issue is the deal's implication for American Major League Baseball. Cuba is a powerhouse in the league, which despite the embargo and Cuba's travel restrictions has welcomed more than 20 new Cuban players since 2010.
