President Barack Obama attacked Republicans Friday for what he depicted as moves to restrict voting, urging a raucous and friendly crowd to fight back in this year's elections.

Speaking to the Rev. Al Sharpton's political rally in a Midtown hotel ballroom, Mr. Obama decried moves to require photo identification at polling places as a Republican-led effort to suppress turnout and shape elections.

"The stark, simple truth is this. The right to vote is threatened today in a way that it has not been since the Voting Rights Act became law nearly five decades ago," he said.

He added: "This recent effort to restrict the vote has not been led by both parties. It's been led by the Republican Party."

A spokesman for the Republicans responded: "Embedded in the Republican Party's DNA is a history of championing civil rights," which he said today includes "equal access to a quality education."

The president's speech doubled as a clarion call for the 2014 election, as he urged the crowd at the Sheraton New York Times Square Hotel to vote and take friends to the polls to protect voting rights.

Democrats face a tough road in this year's midterm elections, amid continuing controversy over the Affordable Care Act and Mr. Obama's sagging approval ratings. Some Democrats have already distanced themselves from the president.

The president's brief speech focused on a battle that has raged since the Supreme Court invalidated part of the Voting Rights Act last year, dealing a blow to Mr. Obama and Democrats who say the law is still needed, 49 years after it passed.

In 2006, President George W. Bush signed legislation extending that oversight, which applied mostly to Southern states, through 2031. Last June, however, the Supreme Court voted 5-4 to end such federal oversight by invalidating the formula Congress used to determine which jurisdictions had to seek "preclearance" from the Justice Department or a federal court to alter election procedures.

Southern Republicans have cheered the ruling, saying the region has changed since the act was passed and that blacks are now registered in large numbers and no longer voting at lower rates than whites.

"To think that government like ours should be continued to be penalized for mistakes of the past, that is contrary to all legal and constitutional principles," said Frank "Butch" Ellis Jr., the attorney for Shelby County, Ala., which won the Voting Rights Act decision. "It's saying that some states are less sovereign than others."

Democrats and Mr. Obama called the ruling a backward step, and the president said Friday that Attorney General Eric Holder would closely review states that change their policies. The attorney general has investigated more than 100 cases since 2009, Mr. Obama said.

Mr. Sharpton said in an interview that fighting over the Voting Rights Act was "premier" to the black community.

Mr. Obama's speech came against the backdrop of partisan fights across the country over voting laws, from requiring photo IDs at the polls to curbing online and weekend voting. Eight states passed "restrictive" voting laws last year, according to the Brennan School of Justice at New York University.

Leaders in Republican-led states say such laws are designed to prevent fraud, while Mr. Obama said they were political efforts to keep millions of people from the polls.

"Common practices like boarding an airplane and purchasing Sudafed require photo ID and we should expect nothing less for the protection of our right to vote," North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory said last year, after his state passed among the broadest regulations.

Mr. Obama said he wasn't against "reasonable" attempts to secure the ballot, but that Republicans couldn't substantiate widespread fraud and that several studies had shown there were few attempts to sabotage the ballot.

"The real voter fraud is people who try to deny our rights by making bogus arguments about voter fraud," he said to loud and sustained applause.

Friday marked Mr. Obama's first appearance in front of Mr. Sharpton's organization, the National Action Network, since 2011, when Mr. Obama was running for re-election.

Mr. Sharpton faced tough headlines this week after fresh disclosures about his role as an informant against the mob in the 1980s. He gave a fiery introduction of Mr. Obama, bringing crowd members to their feet. The civil rights leader lauded Mr. Obama for the Affordable Care Act and public education policies, which he said uplifted the black community.

He has also defended Mr. Obama from others in the black community, including radio show host Tavis Smiley and academic Cornel West.

Mr. Sharpton said in the interview that those who didn't like Mr. Obama were "leading blacks, not black leaders."
