President Barack Obama used a visit to Nike Inc. Friday to defend his proposed Pacific trade agreement, but his choice of venue -- the headquarters of a huge importer -- touched off criticism from labor groups and Democratic lawmakers opposed to the deal.

Critics see Nike as a leading example of an American-based global giant built around low-wage labor in places such as Vietnam, one of the 12 countries negotiating the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership, or TPP.

Mr. Obama, in relaxed remarks at the company's Oregon headquarters, said binding environmental and labor rules in the deal will improve conditions in Vietnam and also avoid incentivizing further outsourcing from the U.S. He said increased trade is important in a world shaped by globalization, while avoiding new deals in the Pacific risks ceding further economic power to China, which isn't a part of the talks. "We can't stand on the beaches and stop the global economy at our shores," Mr. Obama said.

Nike Inc. Chief Executive Mark Parker praised the trade agreement, which could boost the company's financials by lowering U.S. tariffs on athletic shoes made in Vietnam. The company said the trade deal could help it create thousands more jobs in the U.S. over the next decade.

But before the TPP goes live, Congress first needs to pass "fast track" legislation that will expedite a final up-or-down vote on the pact. Mr. Obama's trip offered political support to West Coast Democrats friendly to his trade policy. On Friday he acknowledged Oregon Sen. Ron Wyden for helping craft and support fast track, as well as Rep. Earl Blumenauer, one of just two House Democrats to vote for the bill in committee.

He omitted mention of Sen. Jeff Merkley and Rep. Peter DeFazio, who oppose the legislation. "The savings from tariffs from Nike and other firms would more likely go to profits than they would accrue to the lowering of prices for consumers," said Rep. DeFazio.

Labor unions discounted the job promises. "We have heard similar promises from companies before, and very few have panned out," said Eric Hauser, communications director for the AFL-CIO, the labor federation. Other members of the U.S. footwear manufacturing industry were skeptical about Nike's statement that it could create up to 10,000 manufacturing and engineering jobs in the U.S. over the next decade if the TPP is enacted.

"Whatever job gains Nike is promising, even assuming that they occur, is questionable considering the losses that would result at existing U.S. manufacturers because of the drop on tariffs," said Marc Fleischaker, trade counsel to the Rubber And Plastic Footwear Manufacturers Association.

Nike sells other products including apparel that could see tariff reductions under the TPP.

Boston-based New Balance, a Nike competitor, currently employs about 1,400 manufacturing employees at five factories in New England. Spokesman Matthew LeBretton acknowledged there are concerns among U.S. footwear manufacturers about how a trade pact might affect the industry, but cautioned that it is premature to discuss exactly how without knowing final terms of the legislation.

"We've had productive discussions with the Obama administration regarding TPP, and we're hopeful that the final agreement will reflect those discussions and will allow us to continue to thrive as a domestic producer," Mr. LeBretton said.

Business groups and many economists back the Pacific agreement, pointing toward the potential for economic growth. Mr. Blumenauer said he was "pleased" about Mr. Obama's trip. "These are complex and controversial issues," he said.

Nike spokesman Reggie Borges said it's "too early to say specifically where investments would be within the U.S."
