The landmark climate agreement that more than 190 countries struck in Paris over the weekend ushers in a broad, new international effort to wind down the fossil-fuel era.

But as two weeks of tumultuous negotiations made clear, the pact's success hinges on individual countries making painful choices -- especially in how they produce and consume energy -- that could profoundly shape corporate behavior, financial markets and the global economic landscape.

Paul Polman, chief executive of European-based consumer-goods giant Unilever PLC and an outspoken environmental advocate, said the deal sent an "unequivocal signal to the business and financial communities, one that will drive real change in the real economy."

Others, especially from the fossil-fuel industry and some U.S. companies, were more critical or played down the impact of the agreement. Stephen Eule, vice president for climate and technology at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which lobbies Washington lawmakers on behalf of large U.S. companies, said the deal risks damaging the U.S. economy by pushing the country toward more costly energy from renewable sources.

"The Paris climate conference delivered more of the same -- lots of promises and lots of issues still left unresolved," he said. "The White House's overall domestic strategy of making energy more expensive and less abundant to satisfy international constituencies, many of whom compete against the United States, should worry the business community, American workers and consumers."

Supporters hope the deal will unleash an avalanche of financing and investment from entrepreneurs, companies and international lenders into renewable energy sources, technologies such as electric cars and new ways to capture and store gasses from carbon-intensive fuels such as coal.

Still, Benjamin Sporton, chief executive of the World Coal Association, an industry advocate, said the agreement left room for the coal industry to grow, especially with renewed financing for carbon capture and storage to stop emissions from being released into the atmosphere.

At the core of the agreement, reached Saturday evening in a suburb of Paris, is a collection of voluntary plans submitted by every country to tackle climate change, each reflecting its own economic and political situation. Most of them focus on shifting to renewable energy sources such as solar, wind and, for some, nuclear power and away from carbon-heavy fuels such as coal and oil.

While the plans lay out a monumental challenge, in aggregate they still don't meet the level of cuts in greenhouse-gas emissions that the agreement itself targets. Much of the success of the deal also lies in implementation years from now, by governments that haven't yet been elected. The accord's requirement to review the ambition of the planned cuts to emissions provides what supporters hope will be an open-ended commitment to deeper cuts.

The plans aren't legally enforceable -- a condition the U.S. among others insisted upon -- though the deal does legally bind countries to a periodic review process that backers of the accord hope will prod countries to repeatedly raise their emissions-cutting efforts.

In addition, developed countries have to help provide at least $100 billion annually from a variety of sources after 2020 to help developing countries cut their emissions.

Getting to that agreement was a bumpy path and an outcome that surprised many participants and observers as ambitions in the negotiating rooms grew. A key alliance that sprang up was among a group of small developing nations led by the tiny Marshall Islands, along with Mexico and Colombia -- and the European Union. All wanted a tough agreement that wasn't only legally binding but also aimed for a more aggressive target in curbing the rise in average global temperatures.

The conference's stated goal was to limit global warming to below 2 degrees Celsius above preindustrial levels. The islands wanted a goal of 1.5 degrees, arguing that aiming for the 2-degree target wouldn't be enough to prevent them from being wiped out by rising sea levels, based on most scientific forecasts.

While the U.S. wasn't willing to go that far, it soon joined forces with the alliance, offering to join their calls for a more ambitious target in exchange for acknowledgment that developed nations wouldn't take on the liability for the damage to poor countries caused by rising sea levels and more frequent, more intense storms.

One U.S. demand shaped the conference before it even began: In a divided Washington, Republicans who control Congress vowed to reject anything the Democratic Obama administration sent there for approval. For Todd Stern, who headed the U.S. negotiating team in Paris, that ruled out any legally binding commitment to cut emissions, a major goal of the Europeans and some other countries.

That large caveat thrust a top State Department lawyer into the center of the fray. Susan Biniaz was the arbiter on the critical matter of what would or wouldn't require U.S. congressional authorization during the talks.

The differences were settled in the night between Friday and Saturday, when developed countries agreed to continue leading on financing, leaving large emerging markets like China free to make just voluntary contributions. In return, developing countries accepted regular reviews and checks of their voluntary plans to curb emissions.
