Pope Francis, during a day wrapped in ceremonial fanfare for the first public events of his landmark U.S. visit, challenged America's political and Catholic leaders, bringing a pointed yet conciliatory message to a country embroiled in debates over climate change, immigration, gay marriage and religious freedoms.

On each issue and at each stop on Wednesday -- from the White House to Mass at the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception to a speech to U.S. Catholic bishops -- the pope urged dialogue over opposing views, while standing firm on the Church's moral teachings.

He even waded into a fraught legal struggle between Catholic institutions and the federal government by paying an unplanned afternoon visit to an order of nuns. Pope Francis visited the Little Sisters of the Poor in what his spokesman called a "sign of support" for their demands, so far unsuccessful, for a conscience exemption to the contraception mandate in the health-care law.

By the end of a day that included cheering crowds as he paraded along the National Mall in his open-air popemobile, Pope Francis had both defended and challenged the positions of Democratic and Republican politicians -- and even U.S. bishops.

He endorsed climate-change initiatives President Barack Obama and fellow Democrats support and many Republicans oppose, saying "it seems clear to me also that climate change is a problem which can no longer be left to our future generation."

"When it comes to the care of our 'common home,' we are living at a critical moment of history," the 78-year-old pontiff said.

The pope's remarks, delivered in English, also gave credence to GOP arguments in Congress and on the campaign trail that some of Mr. Obama's core policies infringe on Americans' religious freedoms, such as his support for the Supreme Court ruling in favor of gay marriage.

A "truly tolerant and inclusive" society respects Catholics' "deepest concerns and their right to religious liberty," the pope said, noting the church's rejection of "every form of unjust discrimination," a phrase found in the Catechism of the Church in regard to "homosexual persons."

The pope arrived in Washington on Tuesday, following a visit to Cuba. He will address a joint session of Congress Thursday morning -- the first pontiff to do so. Later in the week, he travels to New York, where he will address the United Nations General Assembly. He closes his trip with a visit to Philadelphia over the weekend, including a Mass on Sunday expected to draw more than a million pilgrims.

The Argentine pontiff set the tone for his first-ever visit to the U.S. at the start of his first full day. "As a son of an immigrant family, I am happy to be a guest in this country, which was largely built by such families," he said at the start of brief remarks during an elaborate White House welcoming ceremony.

The comments came as immigration is under fierce debate in the 2016 presidential race and as efforts to pass an overhaul of the system have stalled in Congress due to party divisions.

"Our mission as bishops is first and foremost to solidify unity," he said. "This service to unity is particularly important for this nation, whose vast . . . resources impose significant moral responsibilities" for world "peace, prosperity and integration."

Later, in a speech to bishops, Pope Francis again touched on the issue of immigration, calling for special attention to the influx of Latin-American immigrants in the Catholic Church -- a group that is the main driver of growth of the faith in the U.S. He told the bishops that they may be challenged by such diversity but that these immigrants have resources that should be shared.

The pope largely avoided the scandal that has seriously undermined the U.S. church -- sexual abuse of minors by priests. He made only a brief reference to the problem in remarks to the bishops, thanking U.S. church leaders for working to ensure that such crimes won't be repeated while making no mention of punishing abusive priests or church leaders who covered up incidents. The pope is expected to meet victims of sex abuse during his visit.

The pontiff, through his policy pronouncements, presented himself as a unifying figure in a deeply divided country.

Democrats and Republicans, who are at odds in current policy debates, agree on their admiration of Pope Francis. The pope's White House arrival ceremony drew Democratic and Republican lawmakers alike, and GOP presidential candidate Jeb Bush attended Mass with the pontiff.

Both parties sought to highlight areas where the pope bolstered their views while playing down areas where he didn't.

Mr. Obama thanked Pope Francis for his key role in supporting his effort to restore U.S. diplomatic relations with Cuba and highlighted the pontiff's endorsement of his climate-change initiatives.

"Holy Father, you remind us that we have a sacred obligation to protect our planet -- God's magnificent gift to us," Mr. Obama said.

Mr. Obama's aides hope the pope's support of initiatives to combat climate change will boost the chances of a broad agreement at an international meeting on the problem this December in Paris.

The pope, who in a major encyclical published last May threw his support behind those arguing that human activity is contributing to climate change, has been unusually forthright in saying he hopes the Paris meeting will produce new solutions.

Republicans, by contrast, seized on the pope's comments on religious freedom and gay marriage.

"I was encouraged that Pope Francis began his first speech in the U.S. by expressing appreciation for America's founding principles, especially religious liberty, and the importance of traditional marriage, family and the sanctity of life to our culture," said Rep. Tim Huelskamp (R., Kan.). Sen. James Lankford (R., Okla.) said he was "grateful to hear Pope Francis bring up the importance of religious liberty."

Yet it is unclear the pope's message will change the tone of policy debates in Washington.

"Everybody wants a clean planet, everybody wants to take care of those who are less fortunate," said Rep. Tom Rooney (R., Fla.). "I believe this pope is saying the right things about how I should live my life as an individual and how I should raise my children. How that translates into public policy, I just think is very different."

Thousands of people turned out for the pope on Wednesday. The day began with Mr. Obama welcoming the pope at the White House, where more than 11,000 were gathered on the South Lawn.

After the public event, Mr. Obama gave Pope Francis a tour of the White House and the two met privately for 40 minutes, without aides, in the Oval Office.

They discussed a range of issues, according to the White House, including the moral responsibility to offer refuge to people who are forced to flee their homelands and the right of all people to practice their faith.

The pope ended his day by celebrating an outdoor Mass where he proclaimed Father Junipero Serra, the friar considered the father of California's missions, a saint.


