President Barack Obama, with the end of his own presidency in sight, vouched for Hillary Clinton in a speech Wednesday intended to rebut Republican criticism of her record as secretary of state and elevate her as a tested leader at a time when national security is taking a central role in the presidential campaign.

"Nothing truly prepares you for the demands of the Oval Office," Mr. Obama said in the keynote address at the Democratic National Convention. "You don't know what it's like to manage a global crisis or send young people to war. But Hillary's been in the room. She's been part of those decisions."

On the third day of the convention, vice presidential nominee Tim Kaine, Vice President Joe Biden and former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg joined Mr. Obama in blasting Republican nominee Donald Trump, attacks sure to be echoed as they fan out on the campaign trail.

In an address that marked a symbolic transfer of Democratic political leadership, from the first African-American president to the first woman to become a major party's nominee, Mr. Obama also addressed Americans who are skeptical about Mrs. Clinton's trustworthiness.

"She's made mistakes, just like I have. Just like we all do," he said. "That's what happens when we try."

Mr. Trump opposes many of the policies Democrats put in place since 2009, including the health-care law, climate-change measures and the Iran nuclear deal. Mr. Obama's aides have said one of the president's motivations for aggressively campaigning for Mrs. Clinton is his belief that Mr. Trump would undo those and other policies.

Throughout the night, Democrats painted a brutal portrait of Mr. Trump as a businessman who is out for himself, not others; who has no knowledge of world affairs or interest in learning; and who has a temperament too uneven to exercise leadership at home and abroad.

"America is already great," Mr. Obama said. "And I promise you, our strength, our greatness does not depend on Donald Trump."

In accepting the vice presidential nomination, Mr. Kaine, who peppered his speech with Spanish, made a case for Mrs. Clinton, but also railed against Mr. Trump.

"Folks, you cannot believe one word that comes out of Donald Trump's mouth," said Mr. Kaine. "Our nation is too great to put it in the hands of a slick-talking, empty-promising, self-promoting, one-man wrecking crew."

Mr. Biden said he has known Mrs. Clinton for more than three decades as an advocate for the middle class and derided Mr. Trump on that score: "He cares about the middle class? Give me a break. That's a bunch of malarkey."

He also said the Republican nominee is exploiting voter fears of terrorism. "He has no clue about what makes America great," Mr. Biden said. "Actually he has no clue, period."

Mr. Bloomberg said Mrs. Clinton would be a "problem solver, not a bomb thrower." He said in his dealings with Mrs. Clinton "we didn't always agree" but she "always listened and that's the kind of approach we need in Washington today."

Mr. Obama's appearance came a day after delegates officially nominated Mrs. Clinton and largely set aside lingering tensions between her supporters and those of her primary rival Bernie Sanders. Senior administration officials said Mr. Obama called Mr. SandersTuesdaynight to thank him for helping facilitate the show of party unity.

The president sought to reinforce Mrs. Clinton's narrative that her command of national security issues makes her a more solid choice for voters than Mr. Trump. He described how he leaned on her during some of the most critical moments of his presidency, including when he weighed whether to authorize the mission that killed Osama bin Laden.

And he cast her as the only candidate who has fought for middle class Americans, drawing a stark contrast with the dim outlook of the country during the Republican convention last week.

"What we heard in Cleveland last week wasn't particularly Republican -- and it sure wasn't conservative," Mr. Obama said. "What we heard was a deeply pessimistic vision of a country where we turn against each other, and turn away from the rest of the world. There were no serious solutions to pressing problems -- just the fanning of resentment, and blame, and anger, and hate."

The Republican National Committee has spent much of this week attacking Mrs. Clinton on her foreign policy record.

Her "judgment is on trial, not her experience," said Richard Grennel, former spokesman for the United Nations during a Republican National Committee's news conference here. "A surgeon who has been a surgeon for 25 years but has botched surgery should not be called a great surgeon."

Mrs. Clinton's supporters hope highlighting her experience on foreign policy and national security issues at a time of rising anxiety over terrorism could swing to her voters considering Mr. Trump.

Polls show voters have more confidence in Mrs. Clinton as a world leader. Asked in a June Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll which candidate would be better at handling foreign policy, 30% of voters said Mr. Trump and 54% said Mrs. Clinton.

On which candidate would be better as commander in chief, 32% said Mr. Trump and 44% said Mrs. Clinton. But on homeland security and combating terrorism, Mr. Trump was favored 44% to 39%.

Mr. Trump, in his GOP convention acceptance speech last week in Cleveland, set a dark tone with dire warnings of national and international peril. Mr. Obama, by contrast, said "I am more optimistic about the future of America than ever before."

After Mr. Obama wound up his speech declaring, "I'm ready to pass the baton," Mrs. Clinton walked onto the stage. The two onetime rivals warmly embraced, waved to the cheering crowd and held hands to raise their fists in the air as Stevie Wonder's "Signed, Sealed, Delivered I'm Yours" played. They exited the stage with their arms around each other's waists.
