In a farewell address to a hall filled with the activists who helped him become the first black president, Barack Obama Tuesday urged Americans to unite to protect the nation's democracy, which he said is being threatened by outside forces as well as tensions within.

"There have been moments throughout our history that threatened to rupture that solidarity," the president said. "The beginning of this century has been one of those times. A shrinking world, growing inequality, demographic change and the specter of terrorism -- these forces haven't just tested our security and prosperity, but our democracy as well," he warned.

Beyond economic and national-security threats, the president said two other forces threaten the nation's future: race relations and a hardening political divide riven by disputed facts such as the veracity of global warming and human contributions to it.

While acknowledging progress for the black community, Mr. Obama said the nation needed to do more and to broaden the discussion to include other minorities whose children also will inherit the nation.

"If we decline to invest in the children of immigrants, just because they don't look like us, we diminish the prospects of our own children because those brown kids will represent a larger share of America's workforce," he said.

Mr. Obama addressed the country still popular among Americans. A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll in December found he has a 52% approval rating, with 42% disapproval.

The president's decision to deliver his speech in his hometown of Chicago, where he first addressed the country after his 2008 victory, is a departure from the traditional settings his predecessors have chosen for their farewell addresses.

Mr. Obama, who campaigned aggressively against his successor, President-elect Donald Trump, has often told his supporters that all the progress of the last eight years "goes out the window" if Americans elect "somebody who has proven himself unfit to lead or represent this country that we love."

On Tuesday, he referred just once to Mr. Trump, who has vowed to dismantle much of Mr. Obama's policies when he takes office on Jan. 20.

"I committed to President-elect Trump that my administration would ensure the smoothest possible transition, just as President Bush did for me," Mr. Obama said.

Mr. Obama also defended policies he sees as the benchmarks of his legacy.

On the domestic front, that included the economy's recovery from the biggest recession since the Great Depression and his health-care law.

In terms of foreign policy, Mr. Obama pointed to the reduction of U.S. troops serving in Iraq and Afghanistan, although his promise to end both of those wars is unfulfilled and he has opened new military fronts against terrorist groups in other countries such as Syria, Libya and Yemen.

Mr. Obama also highlighted his re-establishment of U.S. relations with Cuba, a deal with Iran to restrain its nuclear program and an international climate-change agreement.

Mr. Trump has criticized Mr. Obama on all of those policies, although it remains unclear how he will attempt to change them.

The president, meanwhile, included a veiled bit of advice for the incoming administration. "Rivals like Russia or China cannot match our influence around the world -- unless we give up what we stand for, and turn ourselves into just another big country that bullies smaller neighbors," he said.
