Well, hello everybody. Jambo. It's good to see you. Well, this is a very good-looking group.  So it's wonderful to be with all of you.  My name is Barack Obama.  In case you didn’t know.  I want to, first of all, begin by thanking Kenyatta University for hosting us here today.  We are very grateful.  And the Vice Chancellor is here -- Madam Vice Chancellor, thank you.   And before we get started, I want to point out that this is one of our first regional centers for the Young African Leaders program -- the Young African Leaders Initiative -- or YALI -- that we're doing.  As many of you know, this is one of my labors of love here in Africa, an outgrowth of some of the work that we had been doing.  Seeing the incredible contributions that young leaders were making in so many countries, we thought let’s bring them together and give them opportunities to learn from each other, and network and access resources, so that they can, then, in their home countries, be able to accomplish remarkable things.  And so we're really excited about that.  So we thank the university for allowing us to use these facilities for these outstanding people. I just gave a very long speech. You're saying it was also too long?  Is that what you're saying?  She nodded.  She was all like, yes, it was very long.   So because you just saw my speech, it doesn’t make sense for me to give a whole ‘nother speech.  I'm really here more to listen and to learn. But I do want to just make a couple of brief remarks at the top.  And then what I'm going to do is I'm going to call on a number of you.  I've got a few names already to get us started, and then depending on how much time we have, then I'll try to see if I can call on some additional persons. America has historically been a country of people who participate in the lives of their communities and their societies.  And it's one of the things that make us, I believe, a great nation.  There’s a famous French writer named Alec de Tocqueville, who traveled to the United States, and wrote a very famous book called “Democracy in America.”  And the point that he made in this book during the course of his travels was that what made America a democracy was not just that it had elections, but that it was a society of joiners and volunteers, and people who wanted constantly to be involved in making their communities better.  And if there was an injustice, they wanted to do something about it.  And they would form organizations and they would form town halls, and disseminate information -- so that what the government did was obviously important, but what was just as important was what individual citizens were able to do to create a fabric of mutual concern and regard and advocacy that would shape government policy and would shape how societies were organized. And almost all the progress that America has made in expanding freedom and opportunity has grown as a result of that bottom-up civic participation.  The civil rights movement, the women’s rights movement, the movement most recently to make sure that our gay and lesbian brothers and sisters have equal rights, the movement to end wars, in some cases, the movement to provide better resources for poor children.  And there’s the halfway house movement, and the movement to -- the settlement house movement, rather, and to make sure that children and orphans were properly cared for.  The movement to public education and public universities.  The environmental movement. So many of these things arose because ordinary citizens started to get together and speak out and press their demands on their government. And eventually, politicians responded.   And I got my start in public life not as an elected official but as a community organizer in a poor neighborhood in Chicago.  And I would work with churches and community groups to try to improve the school system, or bring affordable housing.  And we weren't always completely successful, but it taught me the importance of the voices of ordinary people when they come together to create a better vision for the future. And that's why I think civil society is so important.  And that's why I emphasized it in the speech that I made today.  And this is something that I emphasize wherever I go -- democracy does not stop on Election Day.  For a real democracy to work, and for a society to thrive and continually improve, it requires that people continue to participate.  And there have to be laws in place to protect that space and facilitate people’s ability to participate.   Now, the good news is, here in Kenya, you now have a constitution that creates the space for such participation.  Alongside freedom of the press, and freedom of assembly, and the ability to organize politically, these are precious freedoms that have to be protected. Because Kenya is a young democracy there’s always a concern that it might slip back and that space might narrow, despite what the constitution says.  And I just want to say part of the reason why it's important for me to be here today is to send a message that we in the United States at least believe that civil society is important and we want to continue to affirm it, and we want to listen and hear what it is that ordinary citizens, working together, have to say about their communities and about their lives. And if Kenya can continue to cultivate those habits of participation and citizenship and freedom, then the country is going to be better off, and it's going to continue to make progress for all people and not just some.   So with those opening remarks, what I want to do now is just open it up for conversation.  And I have in my hand some names to call on.  I may not get through all of them.  I think you’ve been instructed to try to be relatively brief.  In some cases, what I'll do is I'll respond right away to the comments.  In some cases, I may wait and respond at the end.  But this is designed not so much as a town hall, to ask me questions, it's more designed for you to give me a sense of the things that are important to you, so that I can learn -- and because I think this is going to be televised -- so that the Kenya people as a whole can hear as well. And the only thing I would ask is that everybody be respectful.  And one of the rules of good civil society I believe is that you’re respectful of the people who disagree with you.  And that's part of what makes civil society work.  If you can have civil disagreements, and you can listen to each other and not just shout, that's what creates an environment that leads to progress over the long term. And the only other thing I'm going to do is, because it's warm, I'm going to take off my jacket.  You're free to do so as well.  This is pretty relaxed.   Okay, so -- and we've got a few topics where we've got some civil society organizations that are already working on some of these issues. And one of the topics that hasn’t gotten a lot of attention during my trip but I consider very important because it's part of Kenya’s heritage, but it's also part of global heritage -- and that is the issue of wildlife trafficking, where active citizens are really making a difference. And I'm going to call on Tom Lalampaa of the Northern Rangelands Trust, to tell us about what he’s doing.
