Hello, everybody.  Hello, hello. Hello, everybody.  In a couple hours, I’ll be departing on my final foreign trip as President.  And while we’re abroad, I’ll have a chance to take a few of your questions, but I figured why wait?  I know that there’s a lot of domestic issues that people are thinking about, so I wanted to see if I could clear out some of the underbrush so that when we're overseas, and people are asking about foreign policy questions, people don't feel obliged to tack on three other questions to them. Let me -- I know you still will.  That I'm aware, but I'm trying something out here.  First of all, let me mention three brief topics. First of all, as I discussed with the President-elect on Thursday, my team stands ready to accelerate in the next steps that are required to ensure a smooth transition.  And we are going to be staying in touch as we travel.  I remember what it was like when I came in eight years ago.  It is a big challenge.  This office is bigger than any one person.  And that’s why ensuring a smooth transition is so important. It’s not something that the Constitution explicitly requires, but it is one of those norms that are vital to a functioning democracy -- similar to norms of civility and tolerance, and a commitment to reason and to facts and analysis.  It's part of what makes this country work.  And as long as I’m President, we are going to uphold those norms and cherish and uphold those ideals. As I’ve told my staff, we should be very proud that their work has already ensured that when we turn over the keys the car is in pretty good shape. We are indisputably in a stronger position today than we were when I came in eight years ago.  Jobs have been growing for 73 straight months. Incomes are rising.  Poverty is falling.  The uninsured rate is at the lowest level on record.  Carbon emissions have come down without impinging on our growth. And so my instructions to my team are that we run through the tape. We make sure that we finish what we started, that we don't let up in these last couple of months, because my goal is, on January 21st, America is in the strongest position possible and hopefully there’s an opportunity for the next President to build on that. Number two, our work has also helped to stabilize the global economy. And because there is one President at a time, I’ll spend this week reinforcing America’s support for the approaches that we’ve taken to promote economic growth and global security on a range of issues. I look forward to my first visit in Greece.  And then, in Germany, I’ll visit with Chancellor Merkel, who’s probably been my closest international partner these past eight years.  I’ll also signal our solidarity with our closest allies, and express our support for a strong, integrated, and united Europe.  It’s essential to our national security and it's essential to global stability.  And that’s why the Transatlantic Alliance and the NATO Alliance have endured for decades under Democratic and Republican Administrations. Finally, in Peru, I’ll meet with the leaders of countries that have been the focus of our foreign policy through our rebalance in the Asia Pacific.  This is a time of great change in the world.  But America has always been a pillar of strength and a beacon of hope to peoples around the globe.  And that’s what it must continue to be. Finally, on a personal note, Michelle and I want to offer our deepest condolences to Gwen Ifill’s family and to all of you, her colleagues, on her passing.  Gwen was a friend of ours.  She was an extraordinary journalist.  She always kept faith with the fundamental responsibilities of her profession -- asking tough questions, holding people in power accountable, and defending a strong and free press that makes our democracy work. I always appreciated Gwen’s reporting, even when I was at the receiving end of one of her tough and thorough interviews.  Whether she reported from a convention floor or from the field, whether she sat at the debate moderator’s table or at the anchor desk, she not only informed today’s citizens, but she also inspired tomorrow’s journalists.  She was an especially powerful role model for young women and girls who admired her integrity, her tenacity, and her intellect -- and for whom she blazed a trail as one-half of the first all-female anchor team on network news. So Gwen did her country a great service.  Michelle and I join her family and her colleagues, and everybody else who loved her in remembering her fondly today.
