Good evening, everybody.  I want to begin by thanking the people of Washington, D.C. for hosting us, especially for putting up with more than 50 motorcades.  And I will make one promise to the people of this city -- I will not hold another one of these summits in another six years. I want to thank everyone who participated in our meetings -- more than 50 leaders from every region of the world and key international organizations.  As at our previous summits, we didn’t just come here to talk, but we came here to act.  I know that the very technical nature of nuclear security doesn’t always make for flashy headlines.  But over the past six years, we have made significant, meaningful progress in securing the world’s nuclear material so that it never falls into the hands of terrorists.  And I want to take a few moments to step back and lay out exactly what we have accomplished. Together, we have removed the world’s most deadly materials from nuclear facilities around the world.  With Japan’s announcement today, we’ve now removed or secured all the highly enriched uranium and plutonium from more than 50 facilities in 30 countries -- more than 3.8 tons, which is more than enough to create 150 nuclear weapons.  That's material than will never fall into the hands of terrorists. Fourteen nations and Taiwan -- countries as diverse as Argentina and Chile, to Libya and Turkey, to Serbia and Vietnam  -- have now rid themselves entirely of highly enriched uranium and plutonium.  In particular, I want to point out again that successfully removing all of Ukraine’s highly enriched uranium four years ago meant that the very difficult situation in Ukraine over the past two years was not made even more dangerous by the presence of these materials. As of today, South America -- an entire continent -- is completely free of these dangerous materials.  When Poland completes its removal this year, central Europe will be free of them as well.  When Indonesia completes its work this year, so will all of Southeast Asia.  In other words, as terrorists and criminal gangs and arms merchants look around for deadly ingredients for a nuclear device, vast regions of the world are now off-limits.  And that is a remarkable achievement. We’ve made important progress in the United States as well. In addition to the new steps I announced this morning, we’ve improved nuclear security and training.  We’ve consolidated nuclear materials at fewer facilities, eliminated some 138 tons of our surplus highly enriched uranium -- which would be enough for 5,500 nuclear weapons.  Working with Russia, we’re on track to eliminate enough Russian highly enriched uranium for about 20,000 nuclear weapons, which we are converting to electricity here in the United States. More specifically, as a result of these summits, every single one of the more than 50 nations represented here have taken concrete steps to enhance security at their nuclear facilities and storage sites.  And that includes improved physical security, stronger regulations, abiding by international guidelines, greater transparency, and that includes international peer reviews.  Fifteen new centers have been created around the world to promote nuclear security technologies and training, to share best practices.  And as part of our work today, we agreed to keep strengthening our nuclear facilities’ defenses against cyber-attacks. We’ve bolstered international efforts to disrupt nuclear smuggling.  The Proliferation Security Initiative has grown to more than 100 nations, including regular exercises to improve our collective ability to interdict shipments.  The United States and 36 partner countries have worked to install radiation detection equipment at more than 300 international border crossings, airports and ports.  And we are developing new mobile detection systems as well.  And finally, as I noted this morning, we’ve strengthened the treaties and international partnerships that are a foundation for so many of our efforts. So, again, we have made significant progress.  And everyone involved in this work -- especially our teams, who have worked tirelessly for years -- can take enormous pride in our achievements.  Nevertheless, as I said earlier, our work is by no means finished.  There’s still a great deal of nuclear and radioactive material around the world that needs to be secured.  Global stocks of plutonium are growing.  Nuclear arsenals are expanding in some countries with more small, tactical nuclear weapons, which could be at greater risk of theft.  And as a consequence, one of the central goals of this summit was how do we build on the work that has been done so that we have an international architecture that can continue the efforts, even though this is the last formal leaders’ summit. So even as this is the last of those leader-level summits, today we agreed to maintain a strong architecture, including through the United Nations, the International Atomic Energy Agency, and INTERPOL, to carry on this work and to provide the resources and technical support that is needed to continue this mission.  And we are creating a new nuclear security contact group -- senior-level experts from more than 30 of our countries -- who will meet regularly to preserve the networks of cooperation we’ve built, to institutionalize this work, and to keep driving progress for years to come. At our session on ISIL this afternoon, there was widespread agreement that defeating terrorist groups like ISIL requires more information-sharing.  Everybody understands the urgency in the wake of what’s happened in Brussels and Turkey, Pakistan, and so many other countries around the world.  As a consequence, our Director of National Intelligence, Jim Clapper, is continuing to engage with intelligence leaders from a number of our European partners on deepening our cooperation.  And today, I invited all the nations represented at this summit to join a broader discussion among our intelligence and security services on how we can improve information-sharing within and among our nations to prevent all manner of terrorist attacks, especially those that might involve weapons of mass destruction. In closing, I just want to say that preventing nuclear terrorism is one part of the broader agenda that I outlined seven years ago in Prague -- stopping the spread of nuclear weapons and seeking a world without them.  In recent days, there’s been no shortage of analysis on whether we’ve achieved our vision, and I’m the first to acknowledge the great deal of work that remains -- from negotiating further reductions with Russia to dealing with North Korea’s nuclear program. As I indicated in Prague, realizing our vision will not happen quickly, and it perhaps will not happen in my lifetime.  But we’ve begun.  The United States and Russian nuclear arsenals are on track to be the lowest that they have been in six decades. I’ve reduced the number and role of nuclear weapons in our nuclear security strategy.  In a historic deal, we’ve prevented the spread of nuclear weapons to Iran.  An international fuel bank is being built to promote civil nuclear cooperation. So I’m extremely proud of our record across the board.  And we’re going to keep pushing forward wherever we can, as I hope future administrations do, to bring us closer to the day when these nuclear dangers no longer hang over the heads of our children and our grandchildren.
