Hello, everybody.  So, as all of you know, we're going to Hiroshima tomorrow.  And in the interest of getting you all home at a reasonable hour, we're not going to be doing a press conference after, so I thought I'd give you guys a chance to fire off some questions now. Just a quick comment on the G7 meeting so far.  It's been extremely productive.  I think that one of the benefits of the G7 is that you have likeminded countries who are committed to democracy and free markets, and international law and international norms.  And so for us to be able to get together and focus on critical issues that not only affect individual countries but affect the international order I think is vitally important.  And we very much appreciate the work that the Japanese and Prime Minister Abe have done in organizing an excellent meeting. So far, we’ve discussed issues of the global economy and the need to continue to accelerate growth, to use all the tools at our disposal to make sure that we're not only putting people back to work but also helping to lift wages and helping to make sure that we can sustain the momentum of the recovery that's taken place in the United States most prominently, but also we're starting to see some progress in Europe.  The fact that the Greek debt crisis has been resolved for a reasonable length of time I think should help.  But we've all got a lot of work to do.  And we agreed to continue to focus on making sure that each country, based on its particular needs and capacities, are taking steps to accelerate growth. We had a chance to talk about trade -- not only TPP and our involvement in that, but also T-TIP -- and recommitted ourselves to making sure that we try to finish those negotiations before the end of the year, and emphasized the importance of pushing back against either protectionism or competitive currency devaluations, or the kinds of beggar-thy-neighbor strategies that all too often end up leaving everybody worse off. We began to touch on some of the key security issues that are important to all of us -- the South China Sea and maritime security.  Touched on issues surrounding Ukraine, where we've started to see some progress in negotiations, but we're still seeing too much violence, and we need to get that resolved.  And we're going to spend some time this evening tackling some of the other major international hotspots. So that gives you an update of where we're at so far.  And with that, I'm just going to dive in, and you guys can ask some questions. 
