Thank you, John, for the gracious introduction.  To Mike and Eric, thank you for hosting me.  Thank you to all of you for receiving me.  It is  wonderful to be here.  I want to also acknowledge Mark Strand, president of the Congressional Institute.  To all the family members who are here and who have to put up with us for an elective office each and every day, thank you, because I know that's tough. I very much am appreciative of not only the tone of your introduction, John, but also the invitation that you extended to me.  You know what they say, "Keep your friends close, but visit the Republican Caucus every few months." Part of the reason I accepted your invitation to come here was because I wanted to speak with all of you, and not just to all of you.  So I'm looking forward to taking your questions and having a real conversation in a few moments.  And I hope that the conversation we begin here doesn't end here; that we can continue our dialogue in the days ahead.  It's important to me that we do so.  It's important to you, I think, that we do so.  But most importantly, it's important to the American people that we do so. I've said this before, but I'm a big believer not just in the value of a loyal opposition, but in its necessity.  Having differences of opinion, having a real debate about matters of domestic policy and national security -- and that's not something that's only good for our country, it's absolutely essential.  It's only through the process of disagreement and debate that bad ideas get tossed out and good ideas get refined and made better.  And that kind of vigorous back and forth -- that imperfect but well-founded process, messy as it often is -- is at the heart of our democracy.  That's what makes us the greatest nation in the world. So, yes, I want you to challenge my ideas, and I guarantee you that after reading this I may challenge a few of yours. I want you to stand up for your beliefs, and knowing this caucus, I have no doubt that you will.  I want us to have a constructive debate.  The only thing I don't want -- and here I am listening to the American people, and I think they don't want either -- is for Washington to continue being so Washington-like.  I know folks, when we're in town there, spend a lot of time reading the polls and looking at focus groups and interpreting which party has the upper hand in November and in 2012 and so on and so on and so on.  That's their obsession. And I'm not a pundit.  I'm just a President, so take it for what it's worth.  But I don't believe that the American people want us to focus on our job security.  They want us to focus on their job security. I don't think they want more gridlock.  I don't think they want more partisanship.  I don't think they want more obstruction.  They didn't send us to Washington to fight each other in some sort of political steel-cage match to see who comes out alive.  That's not what they want.  They sent us to Washington to work together, to get things done, and to solve the problems that they're grappling with every single day. And I think your constituents would want to know that despite the fact it doesn't get a lot of attention, you and I have actually worked together on a number of occasions.  There have been times where we've acted in a bipartisan fashion.  And I want to thank you and your Democratic colleagues for reaching across the aisle.  There has been, for example, broad support for putting in the troops necessary in Afghanistan to deny al Qaeda safe haven, to break the Taliban's momentum, and to train Afghan security forces.  There's been broad support for disrupting, dismantling, and defeating al Qaeda.  And I know that we're all united in our admiration of our troops. So it may be useful for the international audience right now to understand -- and certainly for our enemies to have no doubt -- whatever divisions and differences may exist in Washington, the United States of America stands as one to defend our country. It's that same spirit of bipartisanship that made it possible for me to sign a defense contracting reform bill that was cosponsored by Senator McCain and members of Congress here today.  We've stood together on behalf of our nation's veterans.  Together we passed the largest increase in the VA's budget in more than 30 years and supported essential veterans' health care reforms to provide better access and medical care for those who serve in uniform. Some of you also joined Democrats in supporting a Credit Card Bill of Rights and in extending unemployment compensation to Americans who are out of work.  Some of you joined us in stopping tobacco companies from targeting kids, expanding opportunities for young people to serve our country, and helping responsible homeowners stay in their homes. So we have a track record of working together.  It is possible.  But, as John, you mentioned, on some very big things, we've seen party-line votes that, I'm just going to be honest, were disappointing.  Let's start with our efforts to jumpstart the economy last winter, when we were losing 700,000 jobs a month.  Our financial system teetered on the brink of collapse and the threat of a second Great Depression loomed large.  I didn't understand then, and I still don't understand, why we got opposition in this caucus for almost $300 billion in badly needed tax cuts for the American people, or COBRA coverage to help Americans who've lost jobs in this recession to keep the health insurance that they desperately needed, or opposition to putting Americans to work laying broadband and rebuilding roads and bridges and breaking ground on new construction projects. There was an interesting headline in CNN today:  "Americans disapprove of stimulus, but like every policy in it."  And there was a poll that showed that if you broke it down into its component parts, 80 percent approved of the tax cuts, 80 percent approved of the infrastructure, 80 percent approved of the assistance to the unemployed. Well, that's what the Recovery Act was.  And let's face it, some of you have been at the ribbon-cuttings for some of these important projects in your communities.  Now, I understand some of you had some philosophical differences perhaps on the just the concept of government spending, but, as I recall, opposition was declared before we had a chance to actually meet and exchange ideas.  And I saw that as a missed opportunity. Now, I am happy to report this morning that we saw another sign that our economy is moving in the right direction.  The latest GDP numbers show that our economy is growing by almost 6 percent -- that's the most since 2003.  To put that in perspective, this time last year, we weren't seeing positive job growth; we were seeing the economy shrink by about 6 percent. So you've seen a 12 percent reversal during the course of this year.  This turnaround is the biggest in nearly three decades -- and it didn't happen by accident.  It happened -- as economists, conservative and liberal, will attest -- because of some of the steps that we took. And by the way, you mentioned a Web site out here, John --  if you want to look at what's going on, on the Recovery Act, you can look on recovery.gov -- a Web site, by the way, that was Eric Cantor's idea. Now, here's the point.  These are serious times, and what's required by all of us -- Democrats and Republicans -- is to do what's right for our country, even if it's not always what's best for our politics.  I know it may be heresy to say this, but there are things more important than good poll numbers.  And on this no one can accuse me of not living by my principles. A middle class that's back on its feet, an economy that lifts everybody up, an America that's ascendant in the world -- that's more important than winning an election.  Our future shouldn't be shaped by what's best for our politics; our politics should be shaped by what's best for our future. But no matter what's happened in the past, the important thing for all of us is to move forward together.  We have some issues right in front of us on which I believe we should agree, because as successful as we've been in spurring new economic growth, everybody understands that job growth has been lagging.  Some of that's predictable.  Every economist will say jobs are a lagging indicator, but that's no consolation for the folks who are out there suffering right now.  And since 7 million Americans have lost their jobs in this recession, we've got to do everything we can to accelerate it. So, today, in line with what I stated at the State of the Union, I've proposed a new jobs tax credit for small business.  And here's how it would work.  Employers would get a tax credit of up to $5,000 for every employee they add in 2010.  They'd get a tax break for increases in wages, as well.  So, if you raise wages for employees making under $100,000, we'd refund part of your payroll tax for every dollar you increase those wages faster than inflation.  It's a simple concept.  It's easy to understand.  It would cut taxes for more than 1 million small businesses. So I hope you join me.  Let's get this done.  I want to eliminate the capital gains tax for small business investment, and take some of the bailout money the Wall Street banks have returned and use it to help community banks start lending to small businesses again.  So join me.  I am confident that we can do this together for the American people.  And there's nothing in that proposal that runs contrary to the ideological predispositions of this caucus.  The question is:  What's going to keep us from getting this done? I've proposed a modest fee on the nation's largest banks and financial institutions to fully recover for taxpayers' money that they provided to the financial sector when it was teetering on the brink of collapse.  And it's designed to discourage them from taking reckless risks in the future.  If you listen to the American people, John, they'll tell you they want their money back.  Let's do this together, Republicans and Democrats. I propose that we close tax loopholes that reward companies for shipping American jobs overseas, and instead give companies greater incentive to create jobs right here at home -- right here at home.  Surely, that's something that we can do together, Republicans and Democrats. We know that we've got a major fiscal challenge in reining in deficits that have been growing for a decade, and threaten our future.  That's why I've proposed a three-year freeze in discretionary spending other than what we need for national security.  That's something we should do together that's consistent with a lot of the talk both in Democratic caucuses and Republican caucuses.  We can't blink when it's time to actually do the job. At this point, we know that the budget surpluses of the '90s occurred in part because of the pay-as-you-go law, which said that, well, you should pay as you go and live within our means, just like families do every day.  Twenty-four of you voted for that, and I appreciate it.  And we were able to pass it in the Senate yesterday. But the idea of a bipartisan fiscal commission to confront the deficits in the long term died in the Senate the other day.  So I'm going to establish such a commission by executive order and I hope that you participate, fully and genuinely, in that effort, because if we're going to actually deal with our deficit and debt, everybody here knows that we're going to have to do it together, Republican and Democrat.  No single party is going to make the tough choices involved on its own.  It's going to require all of us doing what's right for the American people. And as I said in the State of the Union speech, there's not just a deficit of dollars in Washington, there is a deficit of trust.  So I hope you'll support my proposal to make all congressional earmarks public before they come to a vote.  And let's require lobbyists who exercise such influence to publicly disclose all their contacts on behalf of their clients, whether they are contacts with my administration or contacts with Congress.  Let's do the people's business in the bright light of day, together, Republicans and Democrats. I know how bitter and contentious the issue of health insurance reform has become.  And I will eagerly look at the ideas and better solutions on the health care front.  If anyone here truly believes our health insurance system is working well for people, I respect your right to say so, but I just don't agree.  And neither would millions of Americans with preexisting conditions who can't get coverage today or find out that they lose their insurance just as they're getting seriously ill.  That's exactly when you need insurance.  And for too many people, they're not getting it.  I don't think a system is working when small businesses are gouged and 15,000 Americans are losing coverage every single day; when premiums have doubled and out-of-pocket costs have exploded and they're poised to do so again. I mean, to be fair, the status quo is working for the insurance industry, but it's not working for the American people.  It's not working for our federal budget.  It needs to change. This is a big problem, and all of us are called on to solve it.  And that's why, from the start, I sought out and supported ideas from Republicans.  I even talked about an issue that has been a holy grail for a lot of you, which was tort reform, and said that I'd be willing to work together as part of a comprehensive package to deal with it.  I just didn't get a lot of nibbles. Creating a high-risk pool for uninsured folks with preexisting conditions, that wasn't my idea, it was Senator McCain's.  And I supported it, and it got incorporated into our approach.  Allowing insurance companies to sell coverage across state lines to add choice and competition and bring down costs for businesses and consumers -- that's an idea that some of you I suspect included in this better solutions; that's an idea that was incorporated into our package.  And I support it, provided that we do it hand in hand with broader reforms that protect benefits and protect patients and protect the American people. A number of you have suggested creating pools where self-employed and small businesses could buy insurance.  That was a good idea.  I embraced it.  Some of you supported efforts to provide insurance to children and let kids remain covered on their parents' insurance until they're 25 or 26.  I supported that.  That's part of our package.  I supported a number of other ideas, from incentivizing wellness to creating an affordable catastrophic insurance option for young people that came from Republicans like Mike Enzi and Olympia Snowe in the Senate, and I'm sure from some of you as well.  So when you say I ought to be willing to accept Republican ideas on health care, let's be clear:  I have. Bipartisanship -- not for its own sake but to solve problems -- that's what our constituents, the American people, need from us right now.  All of us then have a choice to make.  We have to choose whether we're going to be politicians first or partners for progress; whether we're going to put success at the polls ahead of the lasting success we can achieve together for America.  Just think about it for a while.  We don't have to put it up for a vote today. Let me close by saying this.  I was not elected by Democrats or Republicans, but by the American people.  That's especially true because the fastest growing group of Americans are independents.  That should tell us both something.  I'm ready and eager to work with anyone who is willing to proceed in a spirit of goodwill.  But understand, if we can't break free from partisan gridlock, if we can't move past a politics of "no," if resistance supplants constructive debate, I still have to meet my responsibilities as President.  I've got to act for the greater good –- because that, too, is a commitment that I have made.  And that's -- that, too, is what the American people sent me to Washington to do. So I am optimistic.  I know many of you individually.  And the irony, I think, of our political climate right now is that, compared to other countries, the differences between the two major parties on most issues is not as big as it's represented.  But we've gotten caught up in the political game in a way that's just not healthy.  It's dividing our country in ways that are preventing us from meeting the challenges of the 21st century.  I'm hopeful that the conversation we have today can help reverse that. So thank you very much.  Thank you, John.
