Thank you.  Zin chào.  Thank you very much.  Thank you.  Well, it’s wonderful to be here in Ho Chi Minh City.  Please have a seat.   I just had the opportunity to visit the Jade Emperor Pagoda. And I think going from a 100-year-old sacred temple to this 21st century Dreamplex is I think a wonderful expression of the evolution that's taken place here in Vietnam -- a country that honors its history, but is also boldly racing towards the future.  And that’s also the story of this city.  This is a city on the move.  And we could see as we were traveling in from the airport all the activity that's currently taking place.  And I’m not just talking about the traffic -- although I do think it might be easier to be on a motorbike than a motorcade.   But this city, like this country, is full of energy.  You can see it in the skyscrapers shooting above the horizon and the shops that are springing up at every corner.  You can spot it online, where tens of millions of Vietnamese are connecting with each other and with the world.  And you can feel it here at Dreamplex, where ideas are becoming a reality.  I just had the chance to see some of those ideas in action -- young people who are making things happen.  I saw a virtual game that can help people recover from nerve injuries, to a machine that lets your smartphone control a laser-cutter -- although you have to be careful with the laser-cutter where you point it.     But some of this energy may be due to your famous cà phê trúng.  That stuff is strong, I understand.  But the real driver of Vietnam’s growth, and the engine of Ho Chi Minh City, is the spirit of entrepreneurship -- the spirit that brings us here today.  And I see it everywhere I travel all around the world.  I meet people -- and especially young people, like the three that we're about to meet -- who are eager to strike out on their own, start something new, and shape their own destinies.  Many want to do more than just create a great new appropriate for a phone.  They want to contribute to their communities and help people live better lives.  And that’s what entrepreneurship is all about.  It's building businesses -- making a profit, hopefully.  But it's also about creating good jobs, and developing new products, and devising ways to serve others.  Entrepreneurship is also the fuel for prosperity that puts rising economies on the path to success. It’s what gives young people like so many of you the chance to channel your energy and your passion into something that is bigger than yourselves.  And it allows us to come together across countries and cultures to solve some of the world’s greatest challenges.  Of course, being an entrepreneur is not easy.  It’s not easy in the United States; it's not easy here in Vietnam; it's not easy anyplace in the world.  It can be tough to get started.  It’s hard to access capital.  It's hard to get the skills that you need to run a business.  You might not always have the mentors and the networks that can help guide you along the way.  And it can be especially difficult for women, for others who traditionally are not viewed as being at the center of business life in a country, haven't had all the access to the same opportunities.  So we’ve got to tap all the talent that's out there.  Just because you are born poor does not mean you should not be able to start a business.  Just because you don't look like the traditional businessman doesn’t mean you can't make a great product or deliver a great service.  And that’s why Dreamplex is so important.  It’s not only a home for digital entrepreneurs like you.  It’s also a place where you can share ideas and work together and build a community that supports each other.  And incubators like this allow Vietnam, alongside its emphasis on entrepreneurship, to see more startups happening in this country than ever before.  Recently, in one year alone, the funding for startups doubled in this country.  And we’re seeing major acquisitions, like Fossil Group’s takeover Misfit Wearables, a Vietnamese company that makes devices like fitness trackers.  We’re seeing Vietnamese-Americans who are coming here to start new ventures -- and that shows a strong bond between the United States and Vietnam. And the world is taking notice.  A leading global venture capital firm called 500 Startups just launched a 10 million dollar fund here in Ho Chi Minh City.  Next month at our Global Entrepreneurship Summit -- something that I've been hosting now for several years -- I’ll welcome eight Vietnamese entrepreneurs to Silicon Valley, so that they can learn from some of the best entrepreneurs and startups and venture capitalists in the world. And your success sends a message to global investors about this country’s incredible potential for innovation.  Hopefully it also encourages other Vietnamese entrepreneurs to chase that new great idea and start that new company, which will continue to fuel an ever-expanding Vietnam economy. I’m here today because the United States is committed to being a partner as you grow.  With the Peace Corps coming to Vietnam for the first time, our volunteers are going to help more Vietnamese learn English -- the language that so often is used in the global economy.  With programs like our Young Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative, we’re helping give thousands of young people across Vietnam the skills and networks they need to turn their ideas into action.  With our U.S.-ASEAN Connect Initiative, we’re matching American investors with Vietnamese entrepreneurs in areas like clean energy.  With the women’s entrepreneurship center we’re going to open here in Vietnam -- WECREATE is what we're going to call it -- we’ll help empower the next generation of women business owners.  And if we really want to encourage entrepreneurship and innovation, I should mention that we need to move ahead with the Trans-Pacific Partnership, because TPP will not only let us sell more of our goods to each other and bring our economies closer together, it will accelerate economic reforms here in Vietnam, boost your economic competitiveness, open up new markets not only for large companies but also for small and medium-sized businesses.  It will raise labor and environmental standards, and it will improve business conditions so that entrepreneurs like you can thrive.  So my message to all the entrepreneurs here today is that I believe in you, America believes in you, and we’re going to keep investing in your success.  Ultimately, it’s the inventors and dreamers, people like those that I just met, those that we'll hear from soon, and all of you in the audience who are going to shape Vietnam’s future for decades to come.  So I'm looking forward to hearing from these outstanding young leaders.  Thank you very much.  Cam on.   So I'm just going to introduce very quickly these outstanding young businesspeople who are leading the way here in Vietnam.  We invited them here to give us some of their thoughts about what would make it easier for them to start their businesses and to continue to nurture the startups that they’re involved with.  The first is Khoa Pham, who is the director of Legal and Corporate at Microsoft Vietnam.  We have Le Hoang Uyen Vy, who is the founder of Adayroi, which is aiming to become the Amazon of Vietnam.  And we have Do Thi Thuy Hang, who’s the vice president of Seedcom, which invests in Vietnamese companies.  So please give them a big round of applause, and we'll start our conversation.
