President Barack Obama warned of tough months to come for the economy while noting some "signs of economic progress," from rising home refinances, increases in consumer and small-business lending, and new hiring for economic stimulus projects.

In a broad, 45-minute speech at Georgetown University here, Mr. Obama sounded a note of cautious optimism as he made his most extensive effort to weave together the many strands of his economic policies. He described it as a two-stage process -- to first lift the economy out of recession, then build what he portrayed as a foundation for long-term growth.

Recounting a Biblical parable, the president declared: "We cannot rebuild this economy on the same pile of sand. We must build our house upon a rock. We must lay a new foundation for growth and prosperity -- a foundation that will move us from an era of borrow and spend to one where we save and invest; where we consume less at home and send more exports abroad."

For weeks now, even some of Mr. Obama's economic supporters have said the president has failed to explain how all of his initiatives -- from bank and auto-industry bailouts to a surge of stimulus spending on health care, energy and education -- fit into a cohesive program. The efforts have often seemed ad hoc and reactive, when in fact they tie together into a long-standing economic agenda, said Robert Reich, a former labor secretary and Obama campaign adviser.

"The public can't tell the difference between a bank bailout and 10-year budget designed to invest in our future productivity," Mr. Reich said. "The narrative is there. It has the virtue of being truthful. It's important to state it."

The president laid out five "pillars" to build a lasting recovery on: new regulations for Wall Street; education spending focused on strengthening the work force; renewable energy investments to create jobs and lessen the nation's dependence on imported oil; health-care cost containment; and long-term deficit reduction based on controlling the growth of Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security.

The speech broke no new policy ground, and some of his pillars seem elusive, especially his vows of fiscal rectitude. Antonia Ferrier, a spokeswoman for House Minority Leader John A. Boehner (R, Ohio), noted that even under the most optimistic scenario, Mr. Obama's budget, according to the Congressional Budget Office, would double the national debt over five years and triple it over 10.

But in making the speech, the president acknowledged his failure to articulate a larger economic vision, saying, "many Americans are simply wondering how all of our different programs and policies fit together."

He also offered some rays of hope amid continuing bad economic news. Schools and police departments have canceled planned layoffs because of the $787 billion stimulus plan. Some industries, like infrastructure construction firms, renewable-energy companies and energy-efficient window makers, have begun to hire in anticipation of federally funded projects. New programs to unclog credit markets are beginning to have an impact on auto, small-business and student loans.

"The severity of this recession will cause more job loss, more foreclosures, and more pain before it ends. The market will continue to rise and fall. Credit is still not flowing nearly as easily as it should," he warned.

He said he wouldn't jettison major elements of his program, such as his national health plan, to satisfy demands for "instant gratification in the form of immediate results or higher poll numbers."

Outside advisers say the president hasn't done enough so far to put his proposals in one broader framework. He rolled out the push for national health-insurance coverage, a plan to cap carbon emissions and develop renewable-energy resources and an unprecedented expansion of federal education support as separate initiatives, inviting criticism that he isn't sufficiently focusing on the recession.


