The difficulty of President Barack Obama's efforts to contain Iran's nuclear program came into sharp relief at the U.N. General Assembly, as the U.S. both pushed ahead with its engagement overtures toward Iran even while American diplomats walked out of a speech given by President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.

President Obama scored a potential victory in his diplomatic engagement with Iran by gaining what appeared to be a commitment from Russian President Dmitry Medvedev to exact economic sanctions against Tehran if it doesn't compromise on its rapidly expanding nuclear program. The severity of sanctions Russia would agree to remained unclear, however.

U.S. officials and members of the United Nations Security Council, plus Germany, held discussions Wednesday to forge a united approach toward Iran ahead of a crucial Oct. 1 meeting with Iran in Geneva. It will be the first direct engagement between the Obama administration and Mr. Ahmadinejad's government on the nuclear issue.

The U.S. and its allies have decided to present Iran once more with a version of an offer they have made previously: They would halt efforts to enact new economic sanctions against Tehran in exchange for it freezing its production of nuclear fuel at current levels, said senior U.S. and European officials.

Russian support for sanctions is viewed as crucial in pressuring Tehran to relent. "The Russian position is simple. . . . Sanctions rarely lead to productive results. But in some cases sanctions are inevitable," Mr. Medvedev said following a meeting with Mr. Obama on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly.

Earlier this month, Mr. Obama announced he was scrapping a U.S. plan to base missile interceptors and radar in Poland and the Czech Republic. The move was widely viewed as a concession to Moscow aimed at gaining its support for a tougher line on Tehran. Just last week, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov suggested his government was taking the sanctions card off the table.

Mr. Ahmadinejad illustrated during his speech to the U.N. General Assembly some of the difficulties the Obama administration could have negotiating with Tehran.

The Iranian leader blasted the West and Israel for corrupting the global economy and called for a wholesale restructuring of the international order. He also barely mentioned his own government's nuclear activities while calling for a moratorium on the world's atomic weapons.

"The engine of unbridled capitalism with its unfair system of thought has reached the end of the road and is unable to move," he said, in prepared remarks. He continued, "By the grace of God, Marxism is gone. It is now history. The expansionist capitalism will certainly have the same fate."

Mr. Ahmadinejad complained that a "small minority" controls politics, economics and culture across much of the world. Mr. Ahamdinejad's rant led the U.S. and Canadian delegations attending the event to walk out of the hall. "It is disappointing that Mr. Ahmadinejad has once again chosen to espouse hateful, offensive and anti-Semitic rhetoric," Mark Kornblau, spokesman for the U.S. mission to the U.N., said in a statement.

In one sign of potential compromise, however, Iran's president said: "Our nation is prepared to warmly shake all those hands which are honestly extended to us. No nation can claim to be free from the need to change and reform in this journey towards perfectness."

The U.S. and its negotiating partners, meanwhile, worked to fine-tune their negotiating position toward Tehran ahead the Oct. 1 meeting.

British Foreign Secretary David Miliband announced alongside Secretary of State Hillary Clinton that the international community's negotiating framework with Iran will largely be based on a freeze-for-freeze proposal it submitted to Iran in June. That offer specifically seeks Iran's freezing of its uranium-enrichment activities at current levels for six weeks, in return for the international community not exacting any new economic sanctions.

The initial freeze could then form the basis of a more expansive negotiation based on the international community offering economic sanctions to Tehran in exchange for its permanently suspending its industrial-scale production of nuclear fuel. "We reaffirm our proposal of June 2008," Mr. Miliband said. President George W. Bush's administration and European nations sought to kick-start dialogue with Tehran using the freeze-for-freeze formula but were regularly rebuffed by President Ahmadinejad. His predecessor, the reformist cleric, Mohammad Khatami, agreed in 2003 to freeze Tehran's uranium-enrichment work. But he restarted the program in 2005 as negotiations stalled.

U.S. and European officials said they are guarded about the willingness of Mr. Ahmadinejad's government to agree to a nuclear freeze. In recent weeks, Iranian officials have publicly ruled out bargaining away its enrichment activities. U.S. and European officials are increasingly describing the Oct. 1 meeting in Geneva as a make-or-break point in their efforts to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue diplomatically.

Many officials are now citing the end of the year as the deadline for President Obama's and the West's overtures to Tehran; Mr. Obama had originally set the deadline as this month.

Should Iran rebuff the offer of the five permanent Security Council members plus Germany in Geneva, the following three months would be used to formalize an economic sanctions regime against Tehran.

Speaking to French television Wednesday, President Nicolas Sarkozy said after December his country is fully prepared to enact new sanctions on Tehran, either unilaterally or as part of a multilateral agreement. "It's always necessary to talk," Mr. Sarkozy said from the U.N., where he also spoke to the assembly. "But why oppose dialogue and sanctions in the case dialogue does not prosper. There will be a deadline and, in my mind, it's December."
