Republicans won control of the House of Representatives as voters dealt a stiff rebuke to President Barack Obama and the Democratic Party, in a historic wave that swept the GOP to power in most levels of government and corners of the country.

Key party figures -- including Budget Committee Chairman John Spratt of South Carolina and 17-term incumbent Ike Skelton, Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee -- were knocked from office. Republicans re-emerged in New England, a GOP-free zone after 2008.

In a major consolation, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid fended off a challenge from a tea-party backed Republican challenger, Sharron Angle, helping Democrats retain the Senate. Republicans nonetheless made gains in the upper chamber, picking up five seats as of early Wednesday morning. The GOP won a series of state houses and governorships as well.

The result sets the stage for a shift in Washington to a divided government that could lead to gridlock. Democrats will control the Senate and the presidency, with Republicans running the House. That could lead to bipartisanship on a few matters -- including education and infrastructure -- but conflict on tough issues splitting the nation, such as taxes, the deficit and health care.

Mr. Obama must now decide how to fashion the remainder of his current term. The president will give his first public indication Wednesday, in a press conference at which White House officials say he will extend an olive branch to the GOP and urge cooperation on issues such as education, infrastructure and oil.

Yet he will defend the achievements of his first two years: a sweeping rewrite of financial-industry regulations, a new law on higher-education aid, and, most of all, the landmark health-care law.

He made a series of congratulatory calls to Republican leaders early Wednesday morning.

The president will be facing a sizable class of freshman Republicans on both sides of the Capitol that will be gunning for his achievements.

In bellwether House races in Indiana, Florida and Virginia, Democrats were swept out of seats that gave the party their majority in 2006.

Old Democratic bulls and mainstays of the party's moderate wing went down to surprising defeat, including Virginia Rep. Rick Boucher, Tennessee Rep. Lincoln Davis, F. Allen Boyd of Florida and Texas' Chet Edward.

Virginia Rep. Tom Perriello also lost; as recently as Friday, the president campaigned for him as a hero of the Democratic Party. The Democrats even lost the Senate seat vacated by Mr. Obama, who traveled several times to Chicago to try to keep Illinois in his column.

Rep. John Boehner of Ohio, who is likely to be elected House Speaker by his party, said late Tuesday that Americans "have sent an unmistakable message" to Mr. Obama, "and that message is: 'Change course.'"

The verdict on the tea-party movement's role in the election appears mixed. Ophthalmologist Rand Paul took a Kentucky Senate seat by a wide margin over Democrat Jack Conway, the state's attorney general. Marco Rubio, the former speaker of the Florida House who remade himself as a tea-party outsider, vanquished Gov. Charlie Crist in a Republican primary and again Tuesday in the general election to claim a Florida Senate seat. Republican Pat Toomey won in Pennsylvania.

But the biggest prize of the night, Mr. Reid, slipped away as did GOP prospects in Delaware, where another tea-party candidate, Christine O'Donnell, stumbled.

Republican gains came not only in Washington but also in state houses and governors mansions across the country. Underlying the voter upheaval is a salient point: This election was the first in nearly 30 years that took place with the unemployment rate flirting with 10%.

House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer (D., Md.) touted his party's efforts on the economy Tuesday night, but conceded: "We haven't done it . . . fast enough or big enough."

Republicans won the governors' mansions in Michigan, Pennsylvania and South Carolina, where tea-party favorite Nikki Haley prevailed. Republicans now control both state chambers in Indiana and Pennsylvania, two states that will play a big role in next year's all-important congressional redistricting. They were among the seven state chambers the GOP picked up as of the early running.

Democrats did have some victories, including in Massachusetts where Gov. Deval Patrick, a close friend of the president, won reelection.

Election Day won't necessarily settle the volatile political landscape. Some Democrats started pointing fingers, preparing to blame the White House for the defeats. The GOP's gains were fueled by the tea party, but questions remain about that movement's longevity.

How quickly the economic pain dissipates will help determine the next election, too, shaping a presidential race that is already showing signs of action. Exit polls suggested that anxiety about the economy was the largest issue on voters' minds, and that a narrow majority believes Mr. Obama's policies will hurt the country in the long run.

Republicans say their mandate is to reverse the Obama gains of the past two years, repeal the health-care act and pare federal spending, including the unspent balance of the president's 2009 stimulus law.

"Anyone whose guide is the constitution and goal is limited government, I'm willing to work with them today," said Sen. Jim DeMint (R, S.C.), in his victory speech Tuesday.

Before those legislative battles begin, a lame-duck Congress must return to Washington this month to pass bills to fund the government and deal with expiring tax cuts, including all of the income, estate, capital-gains and dividend-tax cuts approved under Mr. Bush. Looming over this will be the incoming Congress with its new GOP members.

Mr. Obama will press some of his own initiatives in the lame duck, hoping to ratify a far-reaching arms-control treaty with Russia and allow gays to openly serve in the military.

He and the new Congress will face pressure from voters. Liberal activists say the Democrats' poor showing stems from compromises made by party leaders on health care, gay rights and other issues. With dozens of moderate Democrats swept from office, the remaining Democratic Party in Washington will be more uniformly liberal.

The GOP will face a new element in its midst: tea party-fueled lawmakers who feel beholden to their supporters.

The results Tuesday showed the divide, with tea partiers including Messrs. Rubio and Paul winning alongside Republican veterans such as Rep. John Boozman in Arkansas, who beat Sen. Blanche Lincoln, Kelly Ayotte in New Hampshire and former Bush trade representative Rob Portman in Ohio.

"Tonight there is a tea-party tidal wave, and we're sending a message," said Mr. Paul.
