President Barack Obama opened the final act of a year-long drama over health-care legislation Wednesday, calling on Democrats in Congress to approve the sweeping bill despite political risks and Republican opposition.

The president vowed to rally Americans and wavering lawmakers alike. White House aides said a pair of trips next week will be followed by a stream of public and private lobbying. The White House wants final votes by month's end.

"At stake right now is not just our ability to solve this problem, but our ability to solve any problem," Mr. Obama told a crowd of white-coated doctors and nurses in the East Room, where a year ago he started the drive for the legislation.

With polls showing that the legislation is unpopular and congressional Democrats bracing for big losses in this fall's elections, the president urged them to ignore the politics. "I do not know how this plays politically, but I know it's right," he said. "Let's get it done."

Democrats and the White House are balancing high risks and rewards. Passing the health overhaul would fulfill a decades-old Democratic dream, bringing insurance to some 30 million Americans, and represent the greatest expansion of coverage since Medicare was created in 1965. But if the public judges the overhaul harshly, it is likely to cost some Democrats their seats, and the party's majority in the House could be at risk.

The White House argues that, despite the negative poll numbers, Americans will like the measure if it becomes law, since the focus then could shift from the legislative process to the measure's impact. Polling does find stronger support for the bill's individual provisions than for the package as a whole.

Mr. Obama Wednesday also highlighted a handful of Republican ideas used in the legislation. Republicans dismissed the gesture as insufficient.

"You can't add a couple of Republican sprinkles on the top of a 2,700-page bill and claim that it's bipartisan," said House Minority Leader John Boehner (R., Ohio).

Rejecting Republican calls to start again, the president said that given the "honest and substantial differences between the parties," there was no point. "Everything there is to say about health care has been said," he said to laughter, "and just about everybody has said it."

For the first time, the president explicitly called on Congress to use a procedural technique that will let the Senate give its final approval with a simple majority vote. He didn't use the word for that technique -- "reconciliation" -- but characterized the process as a way of calling a simple "up or down vote" that has been used for big bills before.

Republicans say the reconciliation process was never intended for such major legislation. "History is clear: Big legislation always requires big majorities," Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) said on the floor Wednesday.

Democrats need to approve the changes in the Senate through reconciliation because they no longer have 60 Senate votes necessary to end a standard debate, due to the loss last month of the Massachusetts seat long held by the late Edward Kennedy. White House press secretary Robert Gibbs downplayed the significance of the reconciliation measure, calling it a set of "technical corrections" to the original Senate measure. The reconciliation version contains some significant differences from the Senate bill, including taxes on the wealthy and lower levies on high-value health-insurance plans.

Under the Democratic plan, the process would work like this: First, the House would vote on the bill that the Senate approved in late December. House leaders hope to pass both that Senate bill, and then the reconciliation package, by March 17. After that, the Senate would need to pass the reconciliation bill. By month's end, Democrats hope, the measure would go to the president to be signed into law.

The final push by Mr. Obama amounts to a critical test of his powers of persuasion. Democrats could face a tough decision, balancing the risk of passing potentially unpopular legislation against the risk of inaction and the stigma of having labored for more than a year to produce nothing. Democratic leaders say lawmakers who already voted yes once will be attacked no matter what, but will be in better shape politically if they have something to show for it.

White House aides vowed the president would use all tactics at his disposal to rally support. That includes speeches around the country, starting with a trip to Philadelphia on Monday, media interviews and direct communication with supporters.

He'll also be lobbying lawmakers directly, aides said, including at a White House reception Wednesday that includes a half-dozen Democrats who voted no last year and are being targeted to change their votes.

On Capitol Hill, Democrats have started writing the formal reconciliation bill and are close to a final agreement, aides said. They intend to send it to the Congressional Budget Office for evaluation by the end of the week, a leadership aide said.

To assure the House that the Senate actually will pass the reconciliation measure, senators are considering sending a letter next week with at least 51 senators' signatures promising action, a Senate leadership aide said.

House leaders face the tougher task in rallying support. Speaker Nancy Pelosi has said she will be able to corral the votes, but she hasn't yet secured them. It will require persuading several Democrats who voted no last year to change their votes to yes, to make up for supporters who have turned against the measure or left Congress.

Navigating reconciliation in the Senate poses its own hurdles. Republicans plan to make a series of rule-oriented challenges to the process in order to slow it down and stoke public unease. Republicans "will employ every strategy possible because we know that this will be a disaster for this country," said Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah).

Some Democrats say the partisan rancor the process would generate could drain so much political will from the Senate that it will make it tough to complete other major legislation this year. "It would probably bring everything else to a stop," said Sen. Evan Bayh (D., Ind.).

The reconciliation process prevents Republicans from blocking the bill using a filibuster. But it doesn't stop them from introducing an unlimited number of amendments. Democrats say that, under a worst-case scenario, that could eat up weeks of time on the floor and force the Senate's parliamentarian to rule that the amendments weren't offered in good faith.

Wednesday's address capped two weeks of intense intervention into the health debate by the president, who has been criticized for staying too hands-off previously. White House aides say his steps were needed to propel the bill following the Massachusetts loss.
