The deadliest U.S. tornado in nearly six decades ripped through this southwest Missouri city, leveling schools, businesses and churches and killing at least 116 people.

Rescue workers Monday searched for survivors of a twister more than half a mile wide that roared through here Sunday evening at wind speeds above 190 mph.

"It is utter chaos," City Councilwoman and Vice Mayor Melodee Colbert-Kean said Monday as thunderstorms pelted the city with rain and hail.

The tornado destroyed about 2,000 buildings and damaged roughly a third of the city, including a major hospital, said local and state officials. The death toll is the highest since 116 people died in a tornado in Flint, Mich., in 1953, the National Weather Service said. In Joplin, a city of 50,000, some 500 were injured. Tornadoes over the weekend also were blamed for a death in Minneapolis and one in Reading, Kan.

Search teams in Joplin rescued 17 people trapped Monday in various locations, including one at a Home Depot, according to the Associated Press. Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon declared a state of emergency and said he is "optimistic that there are still lives out there to be saved."

Across Joplin's south side, churches, schools, businesses and homes were reduced to rubble. Road signs beside Interstate 44 near the city were bent backward or torn from the ground.

Uprooted trees, overturned cars, power wires, furniture and other debris littered roads, while leaks from ruptured gas lines sparked fires. "You feel numb," said Theresa Burrell, 50, a casino cashier sorting through debris in front of her home. Her house was mostly intact, with an empty space atop her front porch. "This is where my balcony used to be," she said.

The tornado sheared the roof off the nine-story St. John's Regional Medical Center. Staffers had just a few moments to hustle patients into hallways before the storm blew out windows and rendered the facility useless. Five patients and a visitor to the center died, officials said.

City councilwoman Trisha Raney was in the emergency room there with her grandmother, who had been complaining of panic attacks, when the twister struck. "The ceiling was raining on us," Ms. Raney said. Police escorted uninjured people from the hospital. Outside, they saw buildings reduced to shards. "You couldn't recognize where you were," Ms. Raney said.

About two blocks away, damage was far less extensive at Freeman West Medical Center. But staff there described a long night after the twister hit, as hundreds of people either walked injured to the hospital or arrived in private cars. At one point, the staff sorted through 400 people in the lobby. They sent about 60 patients to hospitals outside Joplin.

Authorities were conducting a door-to-door search. "Some houses where we're picking up bodies are just completely gone," said Newton County Coroner Mark Bridges. "Stuff's stacked on top of stuff, and it's going to take time to dig down."

He said some deaths were reported at a Wal-Mart and he expects bodies to be recovered from nearby building-supply stores and restaurants.

The twister in Missouri was one of 68 reported across seven Midwest states over the weekend, according to the weather service. The Joplin disaster extended a season of tornadoes and flooding that has staggered communities in the country's midsection from Minnesota to Mississippi, killing hundreds and forcing thousands from homes.

In Joplin, tornado sirens began sounding at 5:17 p.m. local time. The tornado touched down 24 minutes later, said Jack Hayes, director of the National Weather Service. City Manager Mark Rohr said the cyclone cut a path nearly six miles long.

David Hinkle, a 20-year-old freshman at Missouri Southern State University in Joplin, said he heard the sirens and that he and a friend drove to see the funnel cloud, but they eventually steered into a highway ditch for cover. They saw one man get out of his car and crawl into the ditch near their car. As the twister's roar grew, the man began pounding on Mr. Hinkle's door, begging to be let inside.

Mr. Hinkle said his friend refused to unlock the car because she was afraid that the wind would rip off the door. "I wanted to let him in so bad, but we just couldn't," he said. Around that time, a tractor-trailer that had been parked on the other side of the road tipped over and was dragged by the wind across two lanes of traffic, stopping a few feet from falling into the ditch onto Mr. Hinkle's car.

When calm returned, Mr. Hinkle said they let the man inside -- all three of them were unhurt -- and began checking on others nearby. "I thought I was going to die, he said, trembling as he spoke at a Red Cross shelter, where he has been volunteering. "We were so close."