A gunman wearing a gas mask and sheathed head-to-toe in body armor opened fire in a theater packed for a midnight showing of a just-released Batman movie, killing at least 12 people and wounding 58 others.

Police in this suburb just east of Denver quickly arrested the alleged shooter, James E. Holmes, a 24-year-old graduate student in neuroscience at the University of Colorado Denver with no known criminal history other than a speeding violation.

The rampage began around 12:38 a.m. Friday at the Century Aurora 16 movie theater, which was crowded for the first showing of "The Dark Knight Rises."

From the front of the theater, the shooter set off what witnesses and authorities described as tear gas or a smoke bomb. He then started firing weapons, including a semi-automatic rifle and shotgun, as the horrified crowd realized too late that the dark figure in their midst wasn't connected to the violent action movie.

"There were many, many rounds fired," Aurora Police Chief Dan Oates said at a news conference Friday, adding, "This is a very tough day for a whole lot of people."

Corbin Dates, a 23-year-old AT&T Inc. worker at the late-night screening, said that when he saw the theater's emergency doors swing open and a man walk inside, he thought it was some kind of movie-related stunt. Even as people screamed, he thought it was part of the show. Then he saw the man throw a gas canister into the crowd and begin firing.

"I heard the gunshots go pop, pop, pop, and I fell to the floor, crawling on the ground to try to get out," Mr. Dates said.

As the gunman walked along the left side of the theater, Mr. Dates said he crawled up the right side, urging frightened patrons to pretend they were dead. He made it out, but saw bodies slumped over in their movie seats as he fled.

The barrage left dozens wounded; they were taken to six hospitals, authorities said. Police initially said 14 were dead but by early Friday had confirmed 12 deaths. The last of the bodies were removed from the movie theater by 5 p.m. on Friday but the police hadn't released the names of the deceased.

Frightened families gathered at a local high school, where Faliciano Gonzalz, 53, went to try to find information about his 17-year-old son, Willy, who was planning to go to the movies and hadn't been heard from since 6 p.m. Thursday.

The Arapahoe County, Colo., Medical Examiner's office confirmed that Jessica Ghawi, 24, an aspiring sportswriter from Texas, was among the deceased. Ms. Ghawi was on the scene of another deadly incident last month in Toronto, Canada, and blogged about walking out of a food court at a mall there moments before a shooting that left two dead and half a dozen injured.

In Aurora, more than two dozen officers rushed to the theater within minutes of the shootings. They quickly arrested Mr. Holmes in a parking lot behind the movie house, next to his white Hyundai. He did not resist, they said. Police believe he acted alone.

He "was dressed all in black, he was wearing a ballistic helmet, a tactical ballistic vest, ballistic leggings, a throat protector and a groin protector and a gas mask, and black tactical gloves," said Mr. Oates, the police chief.

Mr. Holmes had purchased two firearms at a Bass Pro Shop in Denver, the company said Friday.

Mr. Oates said Friday night that the suspect bought four guns over the past 60 days, and over the Internet bought 3,000 rounds for an assault rifle, 3,000 rounds for Glock handguns and about 300 shotgun rounds. The suspect also had a 100-round drum-style magazine for the assault rifle that would have allowed him to fire 50 to 60 rounds a minute.

Aurora, Colo., Police Chief Dan Oates indicated Mr. Holmes might have hidden explosives in his car or apartment. None were found in the vehicle, but a robot that police sent into his apartment found what looked like explosive devices. The presence of what appeared to be tripwires and ammunition prompted the police to wait until Saturday to try to enter the apartment. Residents of the building, and four others nearby, were being sheltered in a high school.

Neighbors at the apartment complex said electronic music suddenly started blaring shortly after midnight Thursday from Mr. Holmes's apartment, at the top floor of an old, red-brick building. The loud music, playing on an endless loop, startled Kaitlyn Fonzi, a 20-year-old biology student who lived directly below and was preparing to go to sleep. She assumed her neighbor was having a party and went upstairs to investigate.

Ms. Fonzi said she knocked loudly, but no one answered. The door rattled as if it were unlocked, and she considered going in but noticed something odd: There were no sounds beyond the booming beat.

She called the police nonemergency line to complain about the noise, she said. Two hours later, she was awakened by a SWAT team, in riot gear and carrying assault rifles, who evacuated all the residents.

The mass shooting is the worst in the U.S. since a gunman killed 32 people and then took his own life in 2007 at Virginia Tech. The Aurora incident was about 16 miles from Columbine High School, where two students went on a shooting spree in April 1999, killing 13 people and wounding more than 20 others before committing suicide.

Mr. Holmes is set to appear in court Monday. Police have obtained a court order sealing search warrants, affidavits and other information in the case.

Neighbors said Mr. Holmes spent at least some of his childhood in a two-story, cream-colored house with a Spanish tile roof in an upper-middle-class San Diego neighborhood.

He graduated in 2006 from Westview High School, a public school in the San Diego area, school officials said. He then went on to study neuroscience at the University of California, Riverside, where he received a bachelor's degree in science and graduated with honors in 2010.

"Academically, he was at the top of the top," said Timothy White, chancellor of UC Riverside.

Family members couldn't be reached Friday, but they released a statement through San Diego police expressing condolences. "Our hearts go out to those who are involved in this tragedy and to the family and friends involved," the statement said.

The University of Colorado Hospital in Aurora, roughly a mile from the movie theater, received 21 patients, nine of them in critical condition, said a spokeswoman, who said the ages of the injured ranged from three months to 45 years old.

"It is an absolutely horrifying scene," said Comilla Sasson, an attending physician who was working in the emergency room at the hospital. She said victims had arrived in private vehicles as well as ambulances, many with severe gunshot wounds.

Military members were among the casualties. The Defense Department said that two airmen and one sailor were injured, and one sailor, known to have been at the theater that evening, was unaccounted for.

President Barack Obama, who cut short a campaign trip in Florida, said in a statement that he was "shocked and saddened" by the shootings and urged citizens to come together as "one American family" to support those affected. Republican presidential hopeful Mitt Romney issued a statement calling the shooting "senseless violence."