"You found each other," said a publicist to a circle of party reporters at the residence of the French Ambassador Saturday night.

It hadn't been too difficult. At the annual Vanity Fair/Bloomberg post-White House Correspondents Dinner party, we were the not-George-Clooneys, grabbing mini-lobster-rolls and shrimp cocktail from cater waiters in mascara and fighting famous-face fatigue.

Editor Graydon Carter, in a tux, presided over the party, which was arguably the most rarified ticket at the capital over the weekend, second to the Correspondents Dinner itself. ("If you're skeptical of social Darwinism, try getting into the Bloomberg party," Bloomberg reporter Joshua Green wrote on Twitter.)

Even Ivanka Trump and Mr. Carter himself briefly waited on line outside the mansion's gates -- in the rain, no less -- before entering the party, held on the ground floor of the regal building.

Eventually, those who made the cut walked past a sprawling lawn, multiple publicists, security guards, and, at the door, "Hunger Games" star Josh Hutcherson, 19 years old.

In the sense that it was as glamorous as a Fellini film and as strange as a Bunuel film, the party lived up to its reputation. Twenty-something bloggers, downing vodka-tonics, smiled at Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand, who, before ducking out, chatted with actress Reese Witherspoon; party reporters kept their tape-recorders hidden, as per the demands of publicists, while murmuring questions to Aziz Ansari; a pool out back begged for a night swim.

It might be easier to list which celebrities weren't inside -- Lindsay Lohan and Kim Kardashian, despite attending the Correspondents Dinner, were not at the Vanity Fair party. The ones we spotted included but were not limited to: Judd Apatow, looking uncharacteristically dapper, bow-tie and all; Harvey Weinstein, chatting up guests in the foyer; Rahm Emanuel, saying hello to Ms. Witherspoon; and Mayor Michael Bloomberg.

Mr. Bloomberg had already been in the same room as Ms. Kardashian and Rick Santorum that day. Who was he more excited to meet?

"I have no idea," he said. "I'm most excited to meet you!" (We've met before.)

Prior to the Vanity Fair fete, media outlets threw pre-dinner cocktail parties in conference and hotel rooms all over the Washington Hilton.

Zooey Deschanel shook many hands in the Bloomberg room, where bacon-wrapped scallops were served; Kelly Ripa stopped by the USA Today room, where sushi was served, and glanced at herself in a pocket mirror. A long line of autograph-seekers, amateur and professional photographers and gawking hotel guests assembled in the lobby to people-watch.

That was only Saturday.

The evening prior to the dinner, guests at the New Yorker's party drank Champagne and slurped oysters on the roof of the W Hotel, which overlooks the White House and the National Mall.

The cocktail napkins had the magazine's cartoons printed on them, and the guests were sent home with small boxes of doughnut holes.

Identically dressed iPad-toting DJ duo Andrew Andrew roamed the media-heavy crowd, which included such ideological foes as Sen. Rand Paul, the Kentucky Republican, and MSNBC host Ed Schultz.

Obama-confidante Valerie Jarrett made an appearance, as did Jesse Tyler Ferguson from "Modern Family."

Eventually, the air-kissing, odd-couple-networking and heavy drinking moved to a subterranean party hosted by the Atlantic. The century-and-a-half old title, which has recently been making an online push, chose a fitting setting: a former Borders in downtown Washington. Cleared of books but with the ceiling tiles and carpet left in place, it had the feel of a suburban basement, but with better drinks, louder music and Woody Harrelson.

Past midnight on Saturday, during our escape from the ambassador's mansion, a mess of black umbrellas outside the residence almost caused us to stumble. "There is no way any of us will find our umbrellas in this pile," a guest rightfully announced.

Mr. Hutcherson, by the door, laughed knowingly. Even the nation's leading famous people have those sorts of everyday mix-ups, we thought.

Or maybe everything really is more fun for them.

"If you can't find yours," said a woman carefully guarding the entrance: "Then we'll make sure you traded up."