President Barack Obama began his second term Monday by setting an agenda for the next four years built on bedrock Democratic social policies, in a provocative speech coming at a time of deep partisanship in the capital and lingering economic uncertainty across the country.

With specifics not usually offered in inaugural addresses, Mr. Obama promised to preserve government health-care programs, expand rights for women and gay couples, and press for gun controls, overhauls of the tax code and immigration laws, as well as climate-change measures.

His priorities sent a message to Washington's leaders that he is looking beyond the fiscal battles set to dominate the coming weeks, while signaling to the nation that he sees a large part of his legacy to be advocacy for underprivileged Americans.

"For we, the people, understand that our country cannot succeed when a shrinking few do very well and a growing many barely make it," Mr. Obama said in a 15-minute speech that drew repeatedly on the opening phrase of the Constitution.

Mr. Obama laid out a governing agenda rooted in Democratic policy goals and equal rights, citing Seneca Falls, N.Y., Selma, Ala., and New York City's Stonewall Inn, birthplaces of the movements for women's equality, civil rights and gay liberation, respectively. "That is our generation's task -- to make these words, these rights, these values of life and liberty and the pursuit of happiness real for every American," the president said.

Mr. Obama took the ceremonial oath of office shortly before noon in front of hundreds of thousands of Americans stretching across the National Mall. In the speech that followed, he sought to reassure Democrats that he wouldn't compromise on their core principles and to warn Republicans he planned to pursue policies that place the two parties squarely at odds.

His second inaugural address did little to puncture the toxic air in Washington, essentially doing away with the signature goal of bridging the capital's political divide that he set when he was sworn in four years ago. Republicans widely viewed the speech as confrontational. Rather than a new beginning, they saw it as the capstone of two years of divided government in which the two parties have struggled to reach policy agreements.

"I am hoping that the president will recognize that compromise should have been the words for today, and they clearly weren't," said Rep. Darrell Issa (R., Calif.). "We were hoping that he would use this day to reach out to all Americans and to all parties. He clearly did not."

The president never mentioned Republicans specifically, but his criticisms were clear. He laced his speech with themes from his presidential campaign, including a reference to the country's prosperity resting "upon the broad shoulders of a rising middle class."

He also vigorously defended social safety-net programs, including Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security. GOP leaders have proposed cutting the programs in recent budget negotiations, and some Democrats have worried that Mr. Obama would agree, given that he has said he is open to such changes as part of a broad deficit-reduction deal that includes tax increases.

"These things do not sap our initiative," Mr. Obama said of the three programs. "They strengthen us. They do not make us a nation of takers; they free us to take the risks that make this country great."

Mr. Obama had taken the official oath of office Sunday in a quiet ceremony with family at the White House, in accord with the Jan. 20 date set in the Constitution for the start of presidential terms. That date fell on a Sunday this year, so Mr. Obama's public inauguration was moved to Monday, a day that coincided with the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday.

With his hand on Bibles used by Dr. King and President Abraham Lincoln, Mr. Obama was sworn in by Chief Justice John Roberts at about 11:50 a.m. on the Capitol steps. His wife, Michelle Obama, and their two daughters stood at his side, as congressional leaders, cabinet secretaries and former presidents Bill Clinton and Jimmy Carter sat nearby.

Vice President Joe Biden, who was officially sworn in Sunday by Justice Sonia Sotomayor, also took a ceremonial oath Monday.

An inauguration official said one million people attended the ceremony but declined to say how organizers arrived at that number. Law-enforcement officials didn't release crowd estimates, but the region's subway authority said 675,000 people had used the system, about 70% of the number for the 2009 inauguration. Many used other forms of transportation to reach the events.

Mr. Obama's speech came at a time of continued economic struggle -- at 7.8%, the U.S. unemployment rate is the same as in January 2009, after peaking at 10% during the president's first term.

Mr. Obama, who took office facing two wars, made scant mention of foreign policy, a contrast from his first inaugural address, which was largely a repudiation of former-President George W. Bush's handling of foreign affairs.

Instead, Mr. Obama on Monday promoted a list of domestic goals favored by liberals, including equal pay for women, expanded voting rights and a shift to sustainable energy sources. He also became the first president to explicitly promote gay rights during an inaugural address.

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, a Kentucky Republican who has been a sharp White House critic, congratulated Mr. Obama but made clear the two parties have different agendas.

"The president's second term represents a fresh start when it comes to dealing with the great challenges of our day; particularly, the transcendent challenge of unsustainable federal spending and debt," Mr. McConnell said in a statement.

Mr. Obama's second inauguration was lower key than his first, but he appeared affected by the ceremony. As he left the podium to walk back into the Capitol, he turned to look out at the cheering crowd, remarking that he wanted to take in the scene once more because he wouldn't get to see it again.

Later, Mr. Obama joined members of Congress and other dignitaries for a lunch before participating in the traditional inaugural parade from the Capitol to the White House. Mr. Obama and the first lady stepped out of the presidential limousine to walk along a stretch of Pennsylvania Avenue, drawing cheers from the crowd. Supporters chanted "Obama" and "Four more years!"

In the evening, Mr. and Mrs. Obama were to attend two balls. At the Commander-in-Chief Ball, for military service members, they danced their first dance to "Let's Stay Together," performed by Jennifer Hudson.