President Barack Obama will make the case for a new phase in nuclear-weapons reductions that would reduce arsenals by another one-third in a major foreign-policy speech in Berlin on Wednesday, a senior Obama administration official said.

Despite mounting tensions with Russia over the Syrian civil war and missile defense, Mr. Obama is expected in the speech to say the U.S. and Russia can significantly reduce their arsenals beyond the cuts mandated under the 2010 New Start, or Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, without undercutting deterrence or capabilities, the officials said.

A one-third cut would allow Washington and Moscow to lower the number of warheads to between 1,000 and 1,100 each, down from the New Start limit of 1,550. That would leave them with more than enough warheads to deter any current or future adversary, said U.S. officials.

"The president determined that we can ensure the security of the United States, and our allies and partners, and maintain a strong and credible strategic deterrent, while safely pursuing up to a one-third reduction in deployed strategic nuclear weapons from the level established in the New Start treaty," a senior Obama administration official said of Mr. Obama's message in the speech.

Mr. Obama told Russian President Vladimir Putin about wanting talks on the reduction plans on the sidelines of a meeting in Northern Ireland of major powers, the official said. "Our hope and expectation would be that, in the coming weeks or months, we'll get folks together to start that conversation. But in terms of a timeline, we're not there," the official said.

Wednesday's speech will be Mr. Obama's most specific arms reduction proposal since the New Start treaty was ratified after a prolonged battle in 2010.

Nuclear-arms experts said Mr. Obama doesn't need to wait for a formal treaty to move on new cuts. The two presidents instead could achieve similar results, more rapidly, through parallel, reciprocal cuts of strategic warheads to well below 1,000 within the next five years. Such cuts could be verified under the 2010 New Start treaty, experts said.

The administration would, "as a general proposition," seek to negotiate such reductions as part of a new treaty with Moscow, which would require Senate ratification, the senior administration official said.

But the White House hasn't ruled out an alternative approach of seeking parallel, reciprocal reductions that could be undertaken by both governments without a treaty, eliminating the need for Senate ratification.

"Our intent is to seek negotiated cuts with Russia so we can continue to move beyond the Cold War nuclear posture," the official said. "But it's too early to tell since we haven't even started discussions with the Russians on what it will look like."

Mr. Obama, several U.S. officials said, wants to push ahead with the reductions despite tensions with Moscow, arguing that the arms-control effort shouldn't be derailed by disagreements.

Mr. Obama's speech in Berlin will be given at the Brandenburg Gate, the site of important addresses by past presidents.

The address will touch on a broad array of topics, but officials said arms control will be an important part. On Tuesday, Ben Rhodes, the deputy national security adviser, told reporters that Mr. Obama will call for the same kinds of activism evoked by President Kennedy 50 years ago to be applied to current challenges, including "nuclear-arms control and nonproliferation."

Mr. Obama has made reducing the size of global nuclear arsenals a priority, but the effort stalled after the 2010 treaty.

Some European officials voiced concerns that Russia won't reciprocate with equal warhead reductions and will balk at cutting its tactical-nuclear-weapons arsenal. Russia maintains some 2,000 tactical nuclear bombs, according to an analysis by the Arms Control Association, which advocates for reductions in the nuclear arsenal. The U.S., in turn, keeps 180 aircraft-delivered nuclear bombs in Europe.

The senior administration official said the disputes between the U.S. and Russia shouldn't affect talks over nuclear reductions because both the U.S. and Russia are acting based on what they see as their interests.

Officials said the administration's plans will keep the nuclear triad -- submarines, intercontinental missiles and bombers -- in place. While the final proposed cut was decided by the White House, the plans have been the subject of intense discussions among the Pentagon and Department of Energy for months.

"If you still have 1,100 weapons that is pretty good deterrence," said one U.S. official.