President Barack Obama took ownership of the burgeoning crisis at the Department of Veterans Affairs, saying Wednesday that he is ultimately responsible for any misconduct, a move that raises the stakes for the White House as calls accelerate for new leadership at the agency.

Mr. Obama addressed the allegations of wrongdoing at VA hospitals for the first time since remarks three weeks ago in Asia. He said he expects VA Secretary Eric Shinseki next week to provide him with preliminary results of an inquiry into claims by VA employees that patients face excessive wait times for care and that secret bookkeeping was used to cover up the delays.

The president vowed to hold accountable anyone who is found to have been involved in misconduct. While praising Mr. Shinseki's tenure, Mr. Obama indicated in answers to questions that it was possible the VA secretary could ultimately be forced to leave. He also said he assigned a senior White House aide to carry out a comprehensive review of VA health services by next month.

"Once we know the facts, I assure you if there is misconduct, it will be punished," he said.

Underscoring the threat, Mr. Shinseki ordered the rescission of a roughly $9,000 bonus paid in 2013 to the director of the Phoenix VA Health Care System, where allegations of misconduct first surfaced last month.

Mr. Obama's comments, which followed an Oval Office meeting with Mr. Shinseki Wednesday morning, capped a weeklong effort by the White House to try to contain a scandal that has widened to more than two dozen VA health facilities across the U.S. since last month.

"They were the right words, and we share the president's urgency to fix what's broke, to hold people appropriately accountable, and to restore faith in the VA," said William Thien, national commander of the Veterans of Foreign Wars.

Criticism of Mr. Obama's handling of the controversy has grown in Congress, with Republicans accusing the president of not acting quickly enough to fix the problems and for waiting too long to speak on the issue.

"This VA issue is a national embarrassment, and the president's response to it is an embarrassment," said Sen. John Thune (R., S.D.). "Tough words just aren't enough when it comes to this issue."

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) said that "so far, I have yet to hear from the president that he is treating the VA crisis with the seriousness it deserves."

During his remarks, Mr. Obama anticipated the GOP criticism, saying: "It is important that our veterans don't become another political football."

The inspector general of the VA is conducting a review of allegations at the Phoenix medical center and other VA facilities of extended wait times for care and the creation of unauthorized waiting lists that made official wait times appear to fall within VA targets.

The VA, in coordination with the White House, also has undertaken a review of the allegations that Mr. Obama said will yield preliminary results next week. The comprehensive review Mr. Obama announced Wednesday is a separate effort designed to look more broadly at the VA.

Employees and doctors at the Phoenix health center have said that as many as 40 veterans may have died while waiting for appointments. Richard Griffin, the acting VA inspector general, said last week his office hasn't found any instances of patient deaths because of excessive wait times after reviewing 17 cases.

Mr. Obama said Mr. Shinseki would be part of the effort to assess the problems at the VA and that the president will wait for investigations to be complete to make any decisions on leadership at the agency.

Mr. Obama's backing of Mr. Shinseki -- though the VA secretary didn't appear with the president -- faces pushback. The American Legion has led the call for the resignation of top VA officials, including Mr. Shinseki, while other groups, such as the VFW, have stopped short of that.

On Wednesday, a Democrat, Rep. John Barrow of Georgia, joined the calls for Mr. Shinseki to resign.

Mr. Shinseki didn't respond to a request for comment.

Meantime, the House passed a bill Wednesday evening that would give the VA secretary more power in demoting and firing senior-level employees.

White House press secretary Jay Carney said Mr. Obama supports the principles in the House bill but has some concerns about the legislation.

After the vote, GOP House Speaker John Boehner's official account tweeted that the bill "is needed now more than ever."

The widening VA problems pose a thorny challenge for Mr. Obama, who has championed services for military veterans since he was a candidate in 2008. He came into office vowing to create a "21st century VA" and implemented changes, including qualifying more veterans with mental-health issues for care.

Critics of his approach say he wasn't involved closely enough and that his aides ignored warning signs of deep-seated problems at the department.

After a relatively muted initial response to the crisis, Mr. Obama last week tapped a senior aide, Rob Nabors, to oversee the VA review and, now, a broader assessment of the agency.

Sharon Helman, the director of the Phoenix VA Health Care System, had received a bonus of about $9,000 on top of her nearly $170,000 salary in 2013, according to a database of federal employee data. As a senior executive service employee, her bonus wasn't unusual.

Ms. Helman was placed on administrative leave earlier this month. On Wednesday, Mr. Shinseki "exercised his authority to rescind Sharon Helman's fiscal year 2013 performance award immediately," the VA said.

Ms. Helman has said she wasn't aware of any secret wait lists, and couldn't be reached for comment on the bonus.
