President Barack Obama said Monday he would begin using his authority to bolster border security and consider taking other steps on his own to change the nation's immigration policy, after angrily declaring that Republicans had finally killed off any chances for immigration legislation this year.

The announcement, in a Rose Garden statement, marked a significant setback for Mr. Obama's second-term agenda and for the constellation of business organizations, Hispanic-Americans and religious groups that had pressed for a sweeping immigration overhaul.

"America cannot wait forever for them to act," Mr. Obama said of Republican lawmakers. "That's why today I'm beginning a new effort to fix as much of our immigration system as I can on my own, without Congress."

It appears all but certain the administration will make at least minor adjustments to deportation policy later this summer that would shield some illegal immigrants from deportation. What additional steps Mr. Obama may take are unclear.

The president faces pressure from immigration activists to grant work permits to millions of undocumented immigrants, using executive authority that he has suggested many times he doesn't have.

Any executive action on immigration is likely to further infuriate a Republican Party that already accuses Mr. Obama of overreach in bypassing Congress to put in place changes to immigration, energy, minimum wage and other policies.

The collapse of Mr. Obama's top legislative priority is a win for conservatives who argued that giving legal status to people in the U.S. illegally would be an inappropriate form of amnesty, and that allowing more immigrants into the country would drive down American wages. It also is a victory for Republicans who wanted to avoid a divisive immigration debate in an election year.

But it leaves Republicans with the same problem they faced in the presidential election two years ago -- a disadvantage with the growing bloc of Hispanic voters. Many in the GOP have cautioned that the party won't win another national election unless it finds a way to improve the party's standing with Latinos. That isn't possible, many caution, without passing an immigration bill.

"In the short term, Republicans are going to avoid an internal civil war over an issue over which they are bitterly divided," said Stuart Rothenberg, a nonpartisan political analyst. "But in the longer term, Republicans will not have resolved an issue that is a huge problem for them in a presidential election year."

Mr. Obama had put immigration atop his second-term agenda and ran for re-election promising that he would find common ground with the GOP on issues such as immigration. He said Mr. Boehner told him by phone last week that there would be no action in the House on immigration this year.

Mr. Boehner blamed the president for the House's inaction. "In our conversation last week, I told the president what I have been telling him for months: the American people and their elected officials don't trust him to enforce the law as written," he said in a prepared statement. "Until that changes, it is going to be difficult to make progress on this issue."

Even with this impasse, Mr. Obama is asking Congress to act on a separate immigration proposal meant to stem the recent surge in children and families from Central America crossing the southern border, which on Monday the president called an "urgent humanitarian challenge." He plans to request more than $2 billion to detain families and bolster border security, and he wants a change in law so that the administration can return certain children more quickly to their home countries.

That proposal, made in a letter to congressional leaders on Monday, found tentative support from Republicans. But it was met with angry opposition from advocates for immigrants, who said the president should focus on the root causes of the surge in migration, not on jailing and deporting people fleeing violence.

The death of immigration legislation is part of a broader collapse of the business community's top legislative priorities this year, straining its relations with the GOP. Two other business priorities -- a reauthorization of the Export-Import Bank and measures to replenish the Highway trust Fund -- are in jeopardy amid opposition or policy demands by fiscal conservatives and tea-party activists.

Johanna Schneider, a Republican political strategist and former executive director for the Business Roundtable, said a rift is growing between the Republican Party and business organizations. Business groups, she said, may "need to make their case clearer to tea-party activists."

The president has the authority to decide how to deploy enforcement resources, and his administration is allowed to exercise prosecutorial discretion in handling cases of people facing deportation. But he doesn't have the authority to enact major immigration-law changes favored by many businesses, which include more visas for high-tech workers and a new guest-worker program for low-skilled workers.

Initially, the president is only promising modest steps. He said he would move available enforcement personnel from the nation's interior to the border. The White House said the administration would continue to deport illegal immigrants who committed serious crimes, but the shift in resources could mean that other undocumented residents will be less likely to face removal.

Beyond that, Mr. Obama's plans are unclear. He said he had directed his staff to look for "additional actions" and send him recommendations by the end of the summer.

Prospects were bright for immigration legislation at the start of Mr. Obama's second term, as prominent Republicans -- including Mr. Boehner -- backed the legislation, saying their election loss underscored the party's need to draw in Hispanic voters.

By last summer, the Senate had passed bipartisan immigration legislation to bolster border security, overhaul the legal-immigration system and provide a pathway to citizenship for many of the 11 million people in the U.S. illegally.

But it went nowhere in the House through 2013. At the start of 2014, Mr. Boehner laid out a set of GOP "standards" to guide immigration legislation. But many Republicans objected to staging a divisive debate during an election year. A week later, the speaker backtracked, unable to persuade Republicans who felt little urgency.


