The shooting death of an unarmed African-American teenager by a police officer turned into a national discourse on racial tension Tuesday as President Barack Obama urged people to remember Michael Brown "through reflection and understanding."

"I know the events of the past few days have prompted strong passions," Mr. Obama said in a statement. "We should comfort each other and talk with one another in a way that heals, not in a way that wounds."

The president's statement came after days of national news coverage of the 18-year-old's death. The shooting prompted peaceful protests as well as two nights of unrest, which led to broken windows and looting at several stores. Police responded by arresting several dozen people and firing tear gas to disperse the crowd Monday night.

Protesters said there is a history of tension between the African-American community in the St. Louis suburb and the mostly white police department. The city is about two-thirds black.

Demonstrators have been holding their arms in the air and chanting "hands up, don't shoot" when approaching police, based on media reports from purported witnesses that Mr. Brown had his hands up and was surrendering to officers when he was shot Saturday. The expression was popularized, in part, on Twitter and other social media.

Police have declined to say whether Mr. Brown had his hands up, citing the continuing investigation into the shooting. But they said there was a violent confrontation between Mr. Brown and the police officer just before the shooting.

Fueling protesters' concerns are conflicting accounts of what happened during the altercation. Police have said Mr. Brown allegedly assaulted the officer and the two struggled over his gun inside the officer's police car. A lawyer for Mr. Brown's family disputed that account.

Ferguson Police Chief Thomas Jackson said the department wouldn't release the name of the officer involved in the shooting because of fears regarding his safety. He cited death threats sparked by recent postings on social media of the name of an officer who wasn't involved in the shooting.

"Officer safety is why we should reasonably not release that officer's name. It far outweighs the value of releasing the name," Mr. Jackson said. The officer is "sad, and he's hurt. He's doing OK, but it's a difficult thing," he said.

The streets of the city of about 21,000 residents were calm Tuesday. Protesters gathered at the offices of St. Louis County Prosecutor Robert McCulloch, whose office will receive the results of an investigation of the shooting being performed by St. Louis County police.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation is conducting its own probe into whether Mr. Brown's civil rights were violated.

Mr. Jackson, who said he doesn't expect the results of the county investigation for five weeks, attended a community meeting Tuesday night in an effort to ease tensions. The meeting included a question-and-answer session for a panel that also included the St. Louis County police chief.

"I want truth and I want justice," Mr. Jackson said at the town hall-style meeting, at Christ the King church. "I want to be part of the solution. I want us all to be part of the solution."

Earlier Tuesday, Steven Thomas, 23, stood on a street corner near where Mr. Brown died holding a banner containing an antigun slogan. "There are places where we don't even want to go because we don't want to deal with the police," said the young African-American man, who is from St. Louis but has relatives here and visits often.

While the shooting has gained national attention, Maria Haberfeld, a professor at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York, said such incidents aren't on the rise. A combination of social media and recent high-profile cases such as the death of a New York City man, in part from a chokehold applied by a police officer, fuels a perception such cases have become widespread.

"There is no escalation in the use of deadly force. What we are seeing is a proliferation of cellphones and cameras," she said.

Mr. Jackson said it is difficult to recruit and retain minority officers to build a department that better reflects the makeup of the community.

Of 53 officers on the force, only three are African-American. "We've lost a few African-Americans to higher paying departments," he said. "The perception is that if we don't have the diversity, we don't have the understanding," Mr. Jackson said. "And perception is reality."
