Masked gunmen stormed the offices of French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo on Wednesday, killing a dozen people and decimating a newsroom that long took pride in defying the outrage -- and death threats -- stirred by its caricatures lampooning Islam.

The brutal rampage shocked a nation that has been living in dread of reprisal attacks since joining the fight against Islamist insurgents in Africa and the Middle East. The attack -- by gunmen armed with AK-47 rifles -- triggered an outpouring of public anger at home and expressions of solidarity from around the world.

French authorities late Wednesday identified three suspects, all Frenchmen: Said Kouachi, 34 years old; his brother Cherif Kouachi, 32; and 18-year-old Hamid Mourad.

Police deployed a vast dragnet with hundreds of officers to conduct a manhunt, searching an apartment in the eastern French city of Reims.

Early on Thursday, officials said Mr. Mourad had turned himself into police at the eastern town of Charleville-Mezieres and was in custody. Police also released photos of the brothers and issued an appeal for information on them.

It is unclear whether the gunmen acted alone or were part of a broader organization. But they appeared to have planned the attack and to have been motivated by radical Islamist beliefs.

French television showed footage of two men wearing balaclavas leaving Charlie Hebdo's offices shouting in French: "We have avenged Prophet Muhammad. We have killed Charlie Hebdo."

The gunmen also shouted "Allahu akbar," or "God is great," according to a witness cited by Paris prosecutor Francois Molins.

The carnage began around 11 a.m. local time. At least two gunmen dressed in black and wearing ski masks first inadvertently stepped into the wrong building before they stormed the offices of Charlie Hebdo in eastern Paris near Place de la Bastille.

After gunning down a receptionist, the men climbed to the second floor, where reporters and cartoonists were in the midst of their weekly editorial meeting, Mr. Molins, the Paris prosecutor, told reporters.

In a burst of gunfire, they killed eight staffers, one guest and a police officer serving as bodyguard to Stephane Charbonnier, the magazine's editor in chief, who had been threatened before, the prosecutor said.

Employees of a TV production company that has offices on the same floor called police upon hearing the shots.

The two men, possibly accompanied by a third person, got into a black car parked in front of the building and drove off, Mr. Molins said. In the next street, they ran into several police patrols, and exchanged gunfire.

One policeman was wounded and lay on the sidewalk. Two of the gunmen got out of the car and calmly moved toward the officer, according to video footage captured by neighbors and shown on French television.

"You wanted to kill us," one of the gunmen shouts. "No, we're good, boss," the policeman says, showing his empty hands.

One of the gunmen comes near and shoots him at close range. The assailant flees with his accomplice; the officer, who authorities later identified as Ahmed Merabet, dies.

The group headed north but crashed into another car. A few blocks away they hit a sidewalk post and abandoned their damaged vehicle, then seized another one before vanishing northeast of the city.

At Charlie Hebdo, the newsroom had turned into a horror scene: "There was blood all over the stairway," said Luc Hermann, whose TV production firm shares part of the second floor with the magazine.

When it was over, some of France's most prominent cartoonists were dead, including Jean Cabut, a graphic artist known by his pen name Cabu, Mr. Charbonnier, known as Charb, and Georges Wolinski, the police said.

"It is too much, it's unbearable, abominable, inhuman," cartoonist Maurice Sinet, who worked for more than 20 years at Charlie Hebdo, said by email. "I have no words to describe how devastated and sad I am."

President Francois Hollande rushed to the scene, calling the shooting a terror attack and "an act of exceptional barbarity," while ordering tightened security around Paris.

Charlie Hebdo has often put France's secular dogma to the test, poking fun at everything that represented power and authority, including organized religion. But many Muslims viewed its cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad, published on several occasions, as provocative or even blasphemous.

In 2011, its offices were struck by arson, hours before a special issue of the weekly -- dubbed "Shariah Hebdo" -- was published. After that, the weekly moved to a new location that was guarded by police.

The attack adds to already high terrorism concerns in Europe at a time when France and the U.K. are fighting alongside the U.S. against Islamic State insurgents in Iraq and Syria. France has also deployed forces in the Sahara in a bid to crush radical groups there.

The shootings could reverberate more broadly across Europe, where anti-immigration politicians -- including Marine Le Pen in France -- are gaining popularity among voters hit by mass unemployment and a sense of social unraveling.

The assault ranks as one of the deadliest attacks in Paris in decades, surpassing the death toll from a 1995 bombing at the Saint-Michel subway station that killed eight.

The attack came on a busy shopping day in Paris with the start of winter sales that typically attract large numbers of tourists.

Mr. Hollande said several terrorist attacks have been prevented in recent weeks. "We knew we were under threat, like other countries in the world," he said. "We are under threat because we are a country of freedom, and because we are a country of freedom we ward off threats and will punish aggressors."

Last month, three violent incidents in three days across France left one person dead, dozens injured and French leaders calling on people to remain calm.

One is being investigated by antiterrorism prosecutors, and authorities said the other two cases appeared to involve mentally unstable individuals.

President Barack Obama was among world leaders to denounce what he called the "cowardly, evil attacks."

"The fact that this was an attack on journalists, an attack on our free press, also underscores the degree to which these terrorists fear freedom of speech," Mr. Obama told reporters at the White House.

Paris was far from under lockdown, however. Thousands of people poured into the Place de la Republique, close to the magazine's office, for an impromptu rally with handwritten signs such as "I am Charlie" or "We are all Charlie."
