Students and police described a scene of chaos and horror when a gunman opened fire at a rural college here on Thursday, killing at least nine and wounding seven in this tight-knit timber community.

Local and federal law-enforcement officials were still trying to piece together details of what happened Thursday morning at Umpqua Community College just outside of Roseburg, a town of about 22,000 around 180 miles south of Portland.

Chris Harper Mercer, the 26-year-old gunman, was killed during a shootout with officers, law-enforcement officials said. Earlier, Oregon Gov. Kate Brown said the shooter was 20 years old. Officials said they don't know what motivated Mr. Mercer.

Douglas County Sheriff John Hanlin, who refused to say the gunman's name, said Thursday night that authorities may not release the names of victims for at least a day pending identification, and notification of kin. "I will not name the shooter," he said. "I will not give him the credit he probably sought prior to this horrific and cowardly act."

Shortly before 10:40 a.m. local time, Douglas County authorities began receiving 911 calls reporting a shooting at the college, which was holding its first week of classes.

A law-enforcement official with knowledge of the situation said initial reports indicated that three handguns and one long gun were recovered from the scene.

"We are holding the community of Douglas County in our hearts today," Gov. Brown said before heading to the school.

During a news conference, President Barack Obama called on Americans to make gun legislation a priority for politicians on both sides of the aisle.

"This is a political choice that we make, to allow this to happen every few months in America," he said, visibly angry, noting that speaking to the nation from the White House following a shooting had become a grim ritual of his presidency.

Word of the shooting spread swiftly through the rural region near the banks of the North Umpqua River -- as locals waited for word of the dead and wounded.

Gavin Bell, a student at the school, said he was sitting in the library, next door to the building where the shooting took place, when several students burst in, shouting for people to call 911. School officials rushed into the library and told students there was an active shooter on campus.

Mr. Bell said he and 20 other students hid in a bathroom until police told them it was safe to leave. "We didn't hear any shots. But everyone was pretty nervous," he said.

Mr. Bell said a student told him she was sitting in class when gunshots rang out. Her teacher opened the door and was immediately shot in the chest, he said she recounted.

Cristina Bayardo, a 21-year-old student, was in a science building next to Snyder Hall, where the shooting occurred.

"We heard something like a backfiring, like a car backfiring," she said. A professor came in and told them to head to the back of the classroom, because there was a possible shooting taking place, she said. "We had no idea whether this was an actual active shooting or not until about 10 minutes later, an email popped up on the system at school and they said this is not a drill."

"We keep thinking, we probably know the shooter," she said. "The probability that you went to high school with this person, that you went to elementary school with this person or worked with this person is very, very high."

Hannah Miles, a 19 year old student studying to be a registered nurse, said she was worrying about essay topics for a writing assignment when she heard shots fired in the classroom next to hers. Then they heard three more shots. Her teacher said, "everybody out, we have to get out," and the students scattered.

Some, including Ms. Miles, ran toward the school bookstore, where they took cover in a back room with the doors locked and the lights off. "And we were just sitting and crouching and we're hugging each other and crying on each other's shoulders," she said. "I just prayed the whole time."

Dr. Rita Cavin, president of the college, said the campus had a no-gun policy, and just last week trained for a shooting emergency. "It is a tragedy, and it's an anomaly," she said. "We have a beautiful, warm, friendly, loving campus."

The wounded were taken to Mercy Medical Center in Roseburg. The PeaceHealth Sacred Heart Medical Center at RiverBend, a hospital in Springfield, Ore., said it had received three patients, all women between ages 18 and 34.

The college, whose oak tree- lined campus is located about 6 miles outside of Roseburg, has about 3,000 full time students and 16,000 part-time students.

Donna Spicer, an adjunct music professor, hadn't gone to work on Thursday, but was frantically reaching out to fellow teachers to make sure they were OK and waited to hear if her students were safe. "Your heart just goes out, hoping your students are OK," she said.

Ms. Spicer said she had been a teacher at Roseburg High School a decade ago when a student shot and wounded a fellow classmate, an event that many people in town referenced on Thursday.

But the violence that occurred at the college on Thursday was still unusual for this scenic pocket of Oregon. Ms. Spicer said the school had only one, unarmed security guard.

The mass shooting comes as Oregon recently has taken steps to tighten its gun laws.

In May, Gov. Brown signed into law a bill requiring background checks on private gun sales, like those set up through online communications.

The law, which took effect in August, subjects those sales to the same mental-health and criminal checks required by federal law at retail outlets nationwide. The majority of states don't require background checks on private sales.

In June, Gov. Brown signed into law a separate bill that gives local law enforcement the right to take guns from those convicted of certain misdemeanor crimes involving domestic violence.

Still, there are gun-friendly elements to Oregon's laws. For instance, the state doesn't ban the transfer or sale of semi-automatic weapons or other large-capacity ammunition magazines. It also specifically doesn't allow its cities or counties to regulate guns.

And Oregon is one of a small number of states that forces colleges to allow guns on public university campuses, at least in some circumstances. A 2011 court case found that state law prevented the legislature from establishing rules prohibiting guns throughout state college campuses.

A law enforcement official said it didn't appear that Mr. Mercer had committed any criminal offenses in the past that would have prohibited him from buying guns.
