President Barack Obama on Tuesday night declared an end to the U.S. economic crisis as he made the case to Americans, and a skeptical Congress, that now was the time to focus on resolving the most stubborn impediment to a full-fledged recovery: lagging progress among the middle class.

"The shadow of crisis has passed," Mr. Obama said in his annual State of the Union address, arguing that a revitalized economy should guide Washington leaders to confront what he called "middle-class economics." Laying out a broad vision for his last two years in office, Mr. Obama asked lawmakers of both parties to "commit ourselves to an economy that generates rising incomes and chances for everyone who makes the effort."

"At this moment -- with a growing economy, shrinking deficits, bustling industry, and booming energy production -- we have risen from recession freer to write our own future than any other nation on Earth," he said.

But Mr. Obama's economic agenda, which hinges on raising taxes on high-income Americans to fund initiatives to benefit those at lower income levels, faces a deeply uncertain path in a Congress that for the first time in his presidency is fully controlled by Republicans.

GOP lawmakers, bolstered by their gains in November's midterm election, dismissed the president's pitch as a recycling of proposals never intended to secure bipartisan support.

"He has ignored the will of the people, instead choosing to offer up the same tired and failed policy proposals we've seen unsuccessfully implemented for the past six years," said Rep. Michael McCaul (R., Texas), chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee.

Mr. Obama, addressing the nation at a moment of emerging economic optimism at home but also heightened anxiety over new threats overseas, called on Congress to show support for the American-led military operation he credited with blunting the advance of Islamic State militants by passing a resolution authorizing the mission.

He also asked lawmakers to pass legislation that would toughen cybersecurity measures to address a rising threat to American security.

But the overarching theme of Mr. Obama's speech was his notion of "middle-class economics," which he described as "the idea that this country does best when everyone gets their fair shot." His plans include some $235 billion in new spending, which he proposes raising through an increase in top capital-gains tax rates and new taxes on many inheritances, among other measures.

The president's speech emphasized themes important to working parents, particularly women, traditionally a strong component of his party's political base. In addition to highlighting the story of a working mother who was seated with first lady Michelle Obama, the president outlined proposals that would expand child-care tax credits, create a new tax credit for families with two working spouses, and guarantee paid leave for parents with new children.

His economic agenda also relies on changes in housing and education policies. He proposed making community college free for millions of students and earlier this month announced the Federal Housing Administration would cut annual mortgage-insurance premiums to help make homeownership more affordable.

While Republicans and Democrats alike cite a stagnant middle class as the most vexing economic problem facing the nation, GOP lawmakers have long opposed Mr. Obama's call for tax increases on wealthier Americans. Still, the parties' shared interest in speaking more directly to economic anxiety and wage stagnation has the potential to push them to find common ground. Mr. Obama's plan also extends the discussion beyond corporate taxation to include individual taxes, as Republicans want.

New Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) said Mr. Obama's proposal to raise taxes on high-income Americans -- $320 billion over 10 years -- damped hopes for making progress on an overhaul of the tax code. But underscoring the prospects for deal-making, remote as they may be, Mr. McConnell didn't rule out an eventual compromise on taxes. He also cited trade pacts and cybersecurity legislation as potential areas of agreement with the president.

"The American people aren't demanding talking-point proposals designed to excite the base but not designed to pass" in Congress, Mr. McConnell said. "What they said they're hungry for is substance and accomplishment. They want Washington to get back to work and focus on a serious jobs and reform agenda."

The coming months will tell how far Mr. Obama and GOP leaders might go in pushing their parties' core supporters to compromise for the sake of agreement on taxes and other matters. Mr. Obama has primarily shown interest in pushing his party only on one issue recently -- rules to allow easier passage of trade deals. Only a handful of Democrats have come forward to support the renewal of legislation for trade-promotion authority, known as fast track, which would ease the passage of a trade pact with Japan and 10 other Pacific nations, as well as a trade deal with the European Union.

While his party suffered significant setbacks in the November elections, the president arrived at the Capitol Tuesday night with some political momentum, with the economic outlook brightening and his job-approval ratings ticking upward. Some 46% of Americans approved of Mr. Obama's job performance in a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll released this week, up from 40% in September.

But despite economic growth and a drop in the unemployment rate, anxiety among middle-class Americans has persisted. Mr. Obama sees the issue as an unfinished piece of his legacy.

Democrats have welcomed the president's proposals for tackling income stagnation and other problems burdening the middle class. "All the indicators that tell us that progress has been made in our economy -- and indeed it has -- it isn't reflected in the paychecks of America's working families," House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) said Tuesday.

But even before the president spoke Tuesday, House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) made his skepticism clear in a video posted to Facebook in which he said, "Tonight isn't about the president's legacy; it's about the peoples' priorities. Making government bigger isn't going to help the middle class."

Mr. Obama on Tuesday also made the case for a host of foreign-policy objectives.

Since last year's State of the Union address, the U.S. has entered into a new war in Iraq and Syria against Islamic State, while Russia has ramped up its intervention in Ukraine and crises have emerged from the Middle East to Africa, from where the spread of Ebola reached the U.S.

On cybersecurity, the president argued, "If we don't act, we'll leave our nation and our economy vulnerable."

Mr. Obama asked Congress to hold off on passing additional economic sanctions on Iran until the U.S. and other world powers completed negotiations with Tehran over its nuclear program. The deadline for the talks, which have twice been extended, is June.

The president also sharpened his pitch for closing the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and he argued that his decision to begin normalizing U.S. relations with that island nation was the right move and urged Congress to lift the embargo against Cuba.

Mr. Obama made a push for policies to address climate change, which have drawn a cool response from Republicans. He made clear he intends to block any congressional effort to roll back his executive changes to the immigration system, which offered safe harbor from deportation to millions of illegal immigrants.

He signaled he is inclined to reject the much-debated Keystone XL pipeline unless it is in the context of a broader effort to rebuild the nation's infrastructure. "Let's set our sights higher than a single oil pipeline," Mr. Obama said.


