Days after floodwaters ravaged southeastern Louisiana, a picture is beginning to emerge of the extent of the devastation, even as the deluge continued to surge into other communities.

"This is a historic flooding event. We are seeing unprecedented flood levels," Louisiana Gov. John Bel Edwards said Tuesday.

At least 11 people died in the floods since pounding rains submerged the region over the weekend, according to the Louisiana Department of Health.

At least 40,000 homes have been damaged, Gov. Edwards said. As of Tuesday morning, about 40,000 people had registered with the Federal Emergency Management Agency seeking help, he said.

Federal officials declared 16 additional parishes as part of a federal disaster area by late Tuesday afternoon, up from four that President Barack Obama declared Sunday. FEMA Administrator Craig Fugate visited the area Tuesday as 2,000 National Guard troops were called to duty.

The governor said some parts of the region -- which served as a haven for many who fled Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans 11 years ago -- were beginning to "enter recovery mode" even as officials continued to search for survivors and more possible fatalities.

The flooding, which has transformed miles of the state into a vast, muddy lake, was caused by heavy storms that dumped more than 2 feet of rain in some areas of Louisiana.

Many roads across the region, including major highways, remained closed Tuesday.

Louisiana is no stranger to severe storms. But Tim Destri, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service office in Slidell, La., said the rain that fell during a 48-hour period late last week was extraordinarily heavy and widespread.

The water rushed into homes, pushing in doors, popping out windows and chasing residents up their stairs, and finally onto rescue boats. It lifted cars, and deposited them sideways in ditches. It uprooted trees and caskets, rearranging a cemetery.

"It didn't have no mercy for anything," said Mervin Fontenot, sifting through piles of soggy clothing and furniture in the muddy ruin of the house he and his wife had built 4 1/2 years ago.

Mr. Fontenot said water rushed into his home Saturday, sending his family -- including his 101-year-old mother-in-law, and his wife, Glenda -- fleeing by boat and jet-ski. A mud line on the walls marked the water's height at 4 feet.

By Tuesday, the water in his neighborhood had receded, leaving Mr. Fontenot and other residents to take stock of the damage -- even as thousands more braced for new flooding as the water moved past Baton Rouge.

In Ascension Parish, southeast of Baton Rouge, the Amite River and other waterways overflowed and spread. Officials declared a dusk-to-dawn curfew and distributed sandbags for people to pile up around their houses. All schools were closed.

In Sorrento, a town of about 1,500 between Baton Rouge and New Orleans, Mayor Mike Lambert said that by late Tuesday morning 25% to 30% of the homes were inundated.

Closer to Baton Rouge, people began inspecting their losses.

"Yesterday, I was watching my life go out in the garbage," said Kay Myers, who emptied her log cabin house of ruined belongings Tuesday. Ms. Myers, 61, who lived in the home 39 years, said many residents were unprepared for how fast the floodwaters rushed in.

Most of Denham Springs, a city of about 10,000 east of Baton Rouge, was damaged. By Tuesday morning, much of the water had receded, leaving behind abandoned cars smeared with dirt along the roads. Homeowners piled foul-smelling furniture, carpeting and other ruined household items along the streets.

Janice Wheat, a manager at a Dollar General store in Denham Springs, spent the morning trying to clean up the wreckage left by 2 feet of water that swept through the building -- and then from looters, who kicked in a window and rummaged through the store.

"I can understand flooding, but what made me angry was the break-in. It wouldn't have been so bad if they hadn't done this," she said.

People who had fled to shelters or to stay with relatives returned home to see what they could salvage.

Mr. Fontenot and his wife, Glenda, both 69, were enjoying retirement and raising chickens in the house they had built. On Tuesday, their chicken coop was still standing, but 14 of their 15 chickens had drowned, many of their bloated bodies floating in a ditch.

Along the driveway of the one-story home, family members and friends piled up chairs, clothes, desks, a couch, lamps and other waterlogged items. The couple hopes that FEMA will help with repairs as they lack flood insurance.

As he stood in the 90-degree heat, Mr. Fontenot said he hadn't had time to become distraught. "The emotion hasn't kicked in yet," he said. "It's there. It just hasn't come out."

The Fontenots have renamed the one chicken that survived. It used to be call Hard Head. Now it's called Lucky.
