Republican Donald Trump won the 2016 election, becoming the nation's 45th president in one of the biggest upsets in U.S. political history.

Mr. Trump reached his stunning triumph over Democrat Hillary Clinton in the early morning hours Wednesday, after a cliffhanger night of vote counting that capped the bitter, monthslong presidential contest.

Defying polls and political pundits, Mr. Trump ran up extraordinary vote totals in rural areas and working-class counties across the U.S., where his message of economic populism resonated. It was an appeal the first-time candidate used in the primaries to upend Republican Party orthodoxy and defeat 16 more experienced Republican rivals.

In the wee hours of the morning, the Associated Press projected Mr. Trump would win, after calling Wisconsin in his favor. Mrs. Clinton's path to victory was shut off when Mr. Trump won Pennsylvania, following a string of victories in the vote-rich battleground states of Ohio, Florida, North Carolina and Iowa.

Mrs. Clinton racked up victories, too, in Nevada, Virginia and Colorado, battleground states that she had expected to win. But Virginia, home of her vice presidential running mate and a sitting senator Tim Kaine, went down to the wire, and many of her other wins came with tight margins after prolonged vote counts. And elsewhere, in urban areas she counted on for support from blacks and other voters, turnout fell short.

The candidates and their supporters were on an emotional roller coaster late into the evening, tracking the early neck-and-neck returns. But as the vote counting dragged into early Wednesday morning, there was a dramatic mood switch between the campaigns: The Clinton rally was ashen with the prospect of defeat; Trump supporters giddy at the turnaround.

John Podesta, Mrs. Clinton's campaign chairman, addressed her supporters after 2 a.m., before the race was called by the AP in favor of Mr. Trump. He asked for patience and conceded nothing.

"They are still counting the votes, and every vote should count," he said, sending supporters home for the night with a request to wait a little longer.

The election provided a historic choice: selecting the first female president in U.S. history, taking the baton of leadership from the nation's first black president, or electing a political novice on the promise of radical change.

The long night of vote counting was an appropriate end to a campaign that had turned into one of the most unpredictable in modern politics. Heading into Election Day, Mrs. Clinton had enough states locked up, according to polls, that Mr. Trump's narrow path required him to win just about every battleground state and pick up at least one Democratic-leaning state.

Mr. Trump's hopes hinged partly on the belief that polls may have underestimated his support from voters reluctant to say they were picking him, and that enthusiasm for his candidacy would give him an advantage in turnout that would be hard to measure.

Some state election officials, including those in North Carolina and New Hampshire, said they experienced a record voter turnout.

Mr. Trump benefited from efforts by the Republican National Committee, long before anyone dreamed he would win the nomination. The RNC decided to build a better ground game to catch up with the performance of Democrats in 2008 and 2012. The work proved essential because Mr. Trump won the nomination unprepared to compete on the ground with Democrats, given his minimal campaign structure and limited support from other Republicans.

Since 2013, the RNC has invested more than $175 million in voter databanks, digital technology and a political infrastructure, which was made available to the Trump campaign.

After such a long and closely fought battle, the next president faces a deeply divided nation. Both candidates were viewed negatively by a majority of voters, polls showed. To many, the presidential election was seen as a choice between the lesser of two evils.

Craig Joerres, 50 years old, of Waukesha, Wis., said he needed a glass of whiskey before voting Tuesday. "It has been such a stressful election season," he said. "Both parties had so much hate." He said he voted for Mr. Trump to shake up Washington.

Liliana Sanchez, age 29, said she voted for Mrs. Clinton, in part, because she was repelled by Mr. Trump.

"I have a daughter who has a disability. I didn't like the way he talked about people who are disabled," the Colorado woman said, referring to a campaign appearance that showed Mr. Trump seemingly mock a disabled reporter. "I'm also, of course, a woman," she added, "I don't like the way he expressed himself about women."

About 130 million Americans were expected to cast ballots in what has been one of the most unpredictable campaigns in modern history.

At stake was not only the presidency, but a vacancy on the Supreme Court, as well as control of the Senate.

At least 47 million people cast ballots in early voting across such states as Arizona, Florida and Nevada, setting records. In Florida, more than six million people voted early -- a 35% increase from 2012. In North Carolina, about half of all registered voters cast ballots early, totaling more than 3 million.

Through mid-October, the two candidates and their allies spent about $1.4 billion on campaign operations and advertising to persuade American voters.

Both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump voted Tuesday morning in their home state of New York, following a frantic spate of 11th hour campaigning in battleground states that spanned New Hampshire, Nevada, Florida and Michigan.

When Mrs. Clinton voted in Chappaqua, N.Y., she spoke of her chance to make history and the enormity of the task should she win.

"I know how much responsibility goes with this and so many people are counting on the outcome of this election, what it means for our country and I will do the very best I can if I'm fortunate enough to win today," she told reporters.

Mr. Trump projected confidenceas he arrived to cast his vote at a public school in New York City.

"I'm very excited," he said. "It's a great opportunity. There is tremendous enthusiasm from everybody."

Asked if he would concede if Mrs. Clinton were declared the winner by night's end, Mr. Trump said, "We'll see what happens."

The presidential campaign presented voters with a contrast of visions -- both about the state of the nation and where it should head next.

Mr. Trump spoke of a country in decline, burdened by illegal immigration, poor trade deals and terrorist threats. He labeled Mrs. Clinton as "crooked." He called for tax cuts and promised to repeal President Barack Obama's health-care law.

The New York businessman said he would build a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border and send those living in the U.S. without permission back to their home countries.

Preliminary exit polls on Tuesday showed that voters, by a nearly three-to-one margin, preferred offering illegal immigrants a path to legal status rather than conducting mass deportations; a solid majority opposed building the wall.

Mrs. Clinton, in contrast, embraced the health care law, along with economic improvements and social changes of the past eight years. After criticizing Mr. Trump for weeks, she sought to end the campaign on an optimistic note, asking voters to choose a "hopeful, inclusive, big-hearted America."

Faced with the chance to elect the first woman to the White House, many voters paid homage Tuesday to those who knocked down barriers in the fight for women's suffrage in the early 1900s.

Mr. Trump will leave his own stamp on political history. He mobilized millions of voters with a blunt challenge to the status quo and gave voice to the economic and political grievances of a struggling American middle class.

Those are sentiments that have been brewing for years. But they emerged with surprising force behind Mr. Trump, who was dismissed as a TV celebrity when he first announced what seemed a quixotic candidacy.
