President Barack Obama's vow to nominate a replacement for Justice Antonin Scalia, and Republicans' determination to stop that nomination, mean the two parties are prepared to make the long-term direction of the Supreme Court a central issue in the 2016 campaign.

The death of Justice Scalia over the weekend put the White House and the Republican-led Congress on a high-stakes collision course that by Monday seemed almost unavoidable.

The White House is gearing up for a titanic fight over Mr. Obama's nominee, which his aides said he would announce in coming weeks, and began reaching out to lawmakers on Capitol Hill.

Mr. Obama is rejecting calls from Republicans in Congress and on the presidential campaign trail for him to leave the Supreme Court vacancy for his successor to fill. White House spokesman Eric Schultz said doing so would be "irresponsible and unprecedented."

"The president will take the time and rigor that this process deserves before selecting a nominee," Mr. Schultz said. "We believe it would be wholly irresponsible to leave the Supreme Court short staffed, especially considering the important work pending before them."

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) has suggested that any nominee Mr. Obama chooses would go nowhere in the Senate. Other Republican senators have taken the same view.

"I intend to make 2016 a referendum on the Supreme Court," Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, a Republican presidential candidate, said Monday while campaigning in South Carolina.

While the Senate has in the past confirmed Supreme Court justices in a presidential election year, those cases are rare and most occurred before the issue of judicial appointments became such a political flashpoint. The last Supreme Court nominee to be confirmed during an election year was Justice Anthony Kennedy in 1988. But his nomination had been announced the previous year, and came after President Ronald Reagan's first two nominees fell through. Justice Kennedy received unanimous support in the Senate.

A protracted fight over a successor could hobble the Supreme Court as it prepares to rule on politically divisive cases involving abortion, contraception coverage, unions and voting rights. Conservatives had been counting on their narrow majority; an empty seat instead could result in a 4-4 deadlock. Among them:

-- A challenge to a Texas law requiring abortion clinics to meet the standards of ambulatory care centers and doctors to hold admitting privileges at a local hospital.

-- A California case questioning whether public employees can be required to join a union or pay it a fee for collective-bargaining services.

-- Another Texas case that questions whether legislative districts must be equal in population, or whether only registered voters, or only U.S. citizens, should be counted.

On the other hand, while the court's right has lost a singular voice, it has retained the votes to restrict abortion access. In the abortion case, if Justice Kennedy -- historically, a swing vote on abortion rights -- sides with fellow conservatives to uphold the Texas law while liberals vote to strike it down, the 4-4 split will leave the state's restrictions in force.

The White House's approach to the fight over a pivotal lifetime appointment will fundamentally shape the debate. As he weighs a list of potential nominees, Mr. Obama faces several possible strategies in his attempt to install a third Supreme Court justice during his presidency.

Any approach faces significant obstacles.

"There's a chance -- but not a great chance -- that he could find a way to thread the needle," Matt Bennett, a Democratic strategist and senior vice president at Washington, D.C., think tank Third Way, said of the president.

Some Democrats have promoted the idea of Mr. Obama using the vacancy to make a political statement by nominating a liberal, such as Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren, who could rally the party base heading into the November election.

White House officials shot down such speculation, saying Mr. Obama would rather leave his own imprint on the Supreme Court than make a symbolic move intended to benefit Democratic candidates.

The president appears to be on track to select a nominee who might win the bipartisan support needed for confirmation, a path that suggests a more moderate candidate whose record could deflect charges of extremism.

Mr. Schultz said the president is seeking a justice "who will faithfully apply the law to the facts at hand," and would rely on "ethics and moral bearings" in cases where the law is ambiguous. In Mr. Obama's view, justice isn't about "some abstract legal theory," but "about the reality of how it affects people's lives," the spokesman said.

Selecting a more moderate nominee could raise the political stakes for Republicans, particularly GOP senators defending seats in Democratic-leaning states, pinning Mr. Obama's hopes on enough of them breaking ranks to approve his nominee.

There are risks for Republicans if they outright reject any Obama nominee. While many Republicans may see that position as principled, Democrats would argue it reflects pure partisanship, and will lead to more gridlock and division.

More significantly, Republicans risk a Pyrrhic victory should they stymie Mr. Obama's plans for the court. If their gamble fails -- and Democrats retain the White House, capture the Senate or both -- Republicans can expect no quarter from their opponents. A Democratic president might be inclined to nominate a more liberal figure than the more moderate one Mr. Obama is likely to put forward.

That leaves open the possibility of a recess appointment to the court. The White House was cool to the option, which would both limit the nominee's time on the high court and touch off a political storm.

The president can bypass Senate approval and appoint an official for a maximum two-year term if a vacancy occurs while Congress is in recess. However, courts ruled that Mr. Obama overstepped his authority in January 2012 by filling three long-standing vacancies on the National Labor Relations Board while the Senate was on a three-day break.

A 2014 Supreme Court ruling on those appointments narrowed the opening a president can use while the Senate is in recess, effectively giving the Senate control over the power.

Still, Senate Republicans could agree to take a recess and allow Mr. Obama to appoint a caretaker justice, ensuring the court was fully staffed for a period of time. Senate Republicans would avoid voting on an Obama nominee and allow the next president and Senate to decide whether the recess appointee deserves confirmation.
