The deadliest shooting attack in U.S. history killed at least 50 people at a popular gay nightclub here, injured 53, left a community and nation in grief and reignited concern about home-grown American terrorists.

Authorities said Omar S. Mateen opened fire at the Pulse nightclub in downtown Orlando in an onslaught that sent patrons scrambling for the exits. Many remained trapped inside in what became an hourslong siege. During the attack, Mr. Mateen took time to call 911 and claim allegiance to Islamic State, officials said, leading them to treat the shooting as a terror attack inspired by a foreign terror organization.

Police shot and killed Mr. Mateen at about 5 a.m. Sunday, Orlando Police Chief John Mina said. He had carried an assault rifle and a handgun, Mr. Mina said.

"Today we're dealing with something that we never imagined and is unimaginable," Orlando Mayor Buddy Dyer said at a news briefing.

Many of the wounded were in critical condition at Orlando Regional Medical Center, where surgeries continued throughout the day, trauma surgeon Michael Cheatham said. Families waited for word of loved ones at an official outpost positioned near the hospital. Later in the day, authorities began releasing names of victims.

In a brief press conference Sunday, President Barack Obama called the shootings an "act of terror and act of hate."

Two counterterrorism officials said Mr. Mateen, 29 years old, worked as a security guard, had a gun license and was a U.S. citizen. Mr. Mateen was born in the U.S. to parents from Afghanistan. He lived in the Port Saint Lucie, Fla., area, officials said.

A woman who said she is the ex-wife of Mr. Mateen described him as an "unbalanced" person who was abusive during their marriage. Mr. Mateen had told her he wanted to become a police officer, she said on CNN, adding that she believed he was mentally unstable, but that she saw no sign that he had terrorist leanings.

A propaganda agency linked to Islamic State claimed the massacre was "carried out by an Islamic State fighter" and "targeted a nightclub for homosexuals." The statement from the propaganda outfit, known as Amaq, was distributed on Telegram, a secure communications channel.

Senior U.S. officials who reviewed the statement said it didn't contain any evidence of a link between the shooter and Islamic State, such as foreknowledge of the attack or indications that the group gave him direction.

In the territory it controls in Syria and Iraq, Islamic State routinely executes homosexuals and releases videos of its fighters throwing men accused of homosexuality off tall buildings. Islamic State supporters online called Sunday for more shootings in gay nightclubs world-wide and referred to an Islamic State spokesman's recent appeal for Western followers to launch attacks at home.

Mr. Mateen had twice been investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for terrorism links in recent years, but those cases were closed after interviews with him proved inconclusive, FBI officials said.

The nightclub shooting in downtown Orlando began around 2 a.m. Sunday.

"All the killing that was done was with an assault rifle, a single weapon . . . it was done very quickly also," said Rep. Alan Grayson, (D., Fla.). "There's blood everywhere" in the club, he said, noting that he spoke to someone who had seen the club after the shooting.

Mayor Dyer said police didn't negotiate with the shooter during the roughly three-hour standoff that followed, though he said officials did communicate with him. Through text messages with hostages, law enforcement officers learned that between five and eight hostages were in a room inside the nightclub with the shooter, while 15 to 25 others were in an isolated room elsewhere in the club.

Police breached the wall of the isolated room with an armored vehicle called a BearCat and were able to move the hostages to safety around 5 a.m.

The shooter then opened the club's door and started firing outside, Mr. Dyer said. "That's when we took him down," he said.

Police didn't immediately enter the club after the shooter was killed because of concerns about possible explosive devices, Mr. Dyer said. Once inside they learned that instead of the feared 20 dead, there were 39 fatalities plus the shooter, along with two outside the club, he said. Nine other people died at or en route to hospitals, he said.

Chief Mina said authorities found a handgun and "an AR-15-type assault rifle," along with an unknown number of ammunition rounds.

Agents from the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives found that Mr. Mateen had legally purchased a rifle and a hand gun within the last week or so, said Trevor Velinor, assistant special agent in charge for the agency's Tampa field division. He declined to say where the weapons were purchased.

A Florida state database shows Mr. Mateen had two firearms licenses: a security officer license and a statewide firearms license. Both are listed as scheduled to expire in September 2017.

The high death toll in Orlando underscores the challenges presented by nightclubs or the Bataclan concert theater in Paris, scene of a terror attack last November that killed 90 people, said Ed Davis, a former Boston police commissioner who is a private security consultant.

Clubs present a dense crowd of people, loud music that can be confused with gunfire and drinking that can slow reaction time, Mr. Davis said. "There's the whole issue of disbelief, thinking it could be part of a show," he said.

Meantime, police in Santa Monica, Calif., arrested a man who was armed with weapons and explosive material and said he was in town for a gay pride parade Sunday in nearby West Hollywood, law-enforcement officials said. They added that there was no known connection to the Orlando shootings. New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said that while there were no credible threats, New Yorkers would see additional police presence in busy areas and "in front of some key LGBT institutions."

On Sunday, officials gathered evidence at the nightclub with medical examiner's staff in white, hooded body suits and blue protective booties.

Orange County Mayor Teresa Jacobs said Orlando's close-knit lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community has been "dramatically impacted." The community is united, she said, adding that "what we saw last night does not reflect what we feel in our hearts and our souls here in Orange County."

The incident follows the fatal shooting late Friday of 22-year-old singer Christina Grimmie after her concert in Orlando by a 27-year-old Florida man who later killed himself. Ms. Grimmie was a YouTube sensation and former contestant on "The Voice."

It also follows a December shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., during which Syed Rizwan Farook and his wife, Tashfeen Malik, opened fire on a holiday party of his co-workers, killing 14 people and injuring 22. The couple was killed during a shootout with police.

Federal authorities have said Farook spent years becoming more radicalized and violence-oriented, in part by watching videos that advocated jihad. On the day of the attack, a Facebook account used by his wife posted a pledge of allegiance to Islamic State.
