The Obama administration's proposal to provide $12 billion to community colleges is widely seen by educators as explicit recognition of the two-year colleges' importance to the economy.

"For years, the Washington conversation about public education has all been about k-12, and increasing access to college," said Andy Van Kleunen, executive director of The Workforce Alliance, a national group of employers, unions, and education and training providers. "This changes the whole game."

President Obama's goal of five million more community college graduates by 2020 would require nearly doubling graduation rates at most community colleges.

According to the American Association of Community Colleges, more than six million students a year enroll for credit at the nation's 1,200 community colleges, but only about 555,000 a year earn a two-year degree, and another 295,000 a year earn a vocational certificate.

"This is the higher education equivalent of the moon shot," said Jamie Merisotis, president of the Lumina Foundation, which supports community-college initiatives. "The president is putting a bet on one sector to get a lot more graduates. They want to have a measurable impact on work force development."

Even before the announcement Tuesday, the Obama administration had put unprecedented emphasis on two-year institutions. Martha J. Kanter, the former chancellor of the Foothill-De Anza Community College district in California, was tapped for the second-highest job in the Education Department.

Secretary of Education Arne Duncan chose a Miami community college for his first official visit to an institution of higher education, and last month Mr. Duncan announced a $7 million grant program for community colleges to train laid-off auto workers and other displaced workers. And it has not hurt that Jill Biden, the vice president's wife, teaches at a community college.

Historically, the mission of community colleges has been to provide postsecondary schooling -- usually through open admissions -- for low-income students who have few other options. Most community-college students are employed adults who attend classes part-time; according to some studies, more than half need remedial courses before they can tackle college-level work.

The Obama proposal would require stronger efforts to retain students until graduation, and encourage partnerships between community colleges and employers to offer work force training.

"Higher retention rates certainly wouldn't be possible without the funding, when most community colleges are facing large enrollment increases just as states are cutting their budgets," said Debra Bragg, co-director of the Forum on the Future of Public Education at the University of Illinois.

Ms. Bragg predicted that most new graduates produced under the Obama proposal would not get two-year degrees. Instead, she said, they would complete certificate programs, usually lasting six months to a year, offering specific credentials for what are known as middle-skill jobs that require more than a high school diploma, but less than a four-year degree.

"There's all kinds of jobs in health care, information technology, in some regions, manufacturing or transportation logistics," Ms. Bragg said.
