President Obama took North Korea's untested new leader, Kim Jong-un, to task on Monday, demanding that China curb his belligerent behavior and declaring that South Korea's economic and democratic achievements would inevitably triumph over the failure and isolation of the North.

In a blunt, 90-minute meeting with China's president, Hu Jintao, before a nuclear security summit meeting here, Mr. Obama pressed the Chinese leader to use his influence over North Korea to stop it from proceeding with a satellite launching next month, a White House official said.

Mr. Obama was clearly stung by the announcement of the impending satellite launching, which the United States has said will be a breach of North Korea's international obligations, and which came only 17 days after the Obama administration had tentatively agreed to send desperately needed food aid to the country.

But the president, the senior official said, was also latching on to the change in leadership in Pyongyang to try to break what Mr. Obama called a long cycle of provocations that were rewarded by countries anxious to ease tensions with an erratic nuclear-armed state.

"We need to have a serious conversation with the North Koreans where they understand that we're going to do things differently in the future," said the senior official, the deputy national security adviser, Benjamin J. Rhodes.

Mr. Hu told the president that China shared his concern about the satellite launching and had conveyed that to North Korea, Mr. Rhodes said. But Mr. Hu appeared to be surprised by the vehemence of Mr. Obama's message, senior officials said.

In that meeting, as well as an earlier one with President Dmitri A. Medvedev of Russia, Mr. Obama was trying to nudge two countries that have been the greatest impediments to more aggressive action against North Korea, Iran and Syria, where a bloody crackdown by President Bashar al-Assad against his opponents is now nearly 13 months old.

Mr. Obama's meetings had a valedictory feel. It was Mr. Medvedev's last session with him before being replaced by Russia's president-elect, Vladimir V. Putin. And it may be one of the last times Mr. Obama meets with Mr. Hu or President Lee Myung-bak of South Korea, both of whose terms expire next year.

Still, the president's mind seemed most fixed on a young man whom he has never met: Kim Jong-un, the new leader of North Korea, who assumed power on the death of his father, Kim Jong-il, in December.

Mr. Obama, speaking to 400 students at a foreign affairs university here, challenged Mr. Kim and his subordinates to give up their belligerent behavior and "have the courage to pursue peace and give a better life to the people of North Korea."

The president spoke at length about a potential future reunification of the Korean Peninsula, describing the Koreans as "one people," and saying that "if just given the chance, if given their freedom, Koreans in the North are capable of great progress as well."

Mr. Obama, who held the first nuclear security summit meeting in 2010, offered a report card on his campaign to prod countries to curb the spread of nuclear material and reduce the risk of nuclear terrorism.

But the most noteworthy elements of his speech were his admiration for South Korea and criticism of its estranged northern neighbor, which has barraged the South with threats.

Addressing Pyongyang directly, Mr. Obama said, "Your provocations and pursuit of nuclear weapons have not achieved the security you seek; they have undermined it."

The United States, he said, bore North Korea no "hostile intent." But if the country did not change course, he said, it would face "more broken dreams, more isolation, ever more distance between the people of North Korea and the dignity and the opportunity that they deserve."

Drawing an analogy to the once-divided Germany, Mr. Obama spoke of his visit to the demilitarized zone on Sunday, where he peered into a country whose leaders, he said, are willing to allow their people to starve. The two Koreas, he said, will inevitably be reunified.

When they are, Mr. Obama said to applause, "change will unfold that once seemed impossible. And checkpoints will open and watchtowers will stand empty, and families long separated will finally be reunited. And the Korean people, at long last, will be whole and free."

Mr. Obama, who noted that he had visited Seoul three times as president -- more than any other foreign capital -- sprinkled his speech with Korean phrases and references to Korean social media services.

There was no immediate reaction from Pyongyang to Mr. Obama's remarks. The North's state-run Korea Central News Agency's Web site was monopolized Monday by dispatches about grief-stricken North Koreans participating in ceremonies observing the 100-day mourning period for Kim Jong-il.

Turning to the issue of nuclear security, Mr. Obama hailed successes like Georgia and Moldova, where authorities seized highly enriched uranium from smugglers. He praised Ukraine, which announced it had moved all highly enriched uranium out of the country.

The killing of Osama bin Laden and the crippling of Al Qaeda, the president said, meant that "a terrorist organization that has actively sought nuclear weapons is now on the path to defeat."

But Mr. Obama acknowledged unfinished business, notably with North Korea and Iran, with whom the West, supported by Russia and China, is preparing to hold another round of talks over its nuclear program. "There is time to solve this diplomatically," he said, "but time is short."

The president said he remained committed to the goal he set in a speech in Prague in 2009: A world without nuclear weapons. The United States, he added, had a "unique responsibility to act."

"I say this as president of the only nation ever to use nuclear weapons," Mr. Obama said. "I say it as a commander in chief who knows that our nuclear codes are never far from my side."