It is good to be back. It is good to be back.  As some of you may know, I actually spent 10 years teaching classes and seminars here, and it was really fun.   And I missed it.  And I thought, well, why don't I come back and say hi to everybody. So there are a couple of people I want to acknowledge because they helped to facilitate this.  First of all, I want to thank Dean Miles for closing down the school, I guess, for a day.   Thank you.  Special acknowledgements for Geoff Stone and Doug Baird, who were great friends when I was teaching here and were partly responsible for having me actually take on some responsibility straight out of law school to mold the minds of students who were just barely younger than me.  I know that because some of them I saw and they all have gray hair now -- which is a little troubling. We've got a terrific congressional delegation who’s here, and I just want to acknowledge them.  First of all, your outstanding senior Senator for the great state of Illinois, Dick Durbin is here. And we've got Congressman Bobby Rush. Congressman Danny Davis. Congressman Bill Foster. And Congressman Mike Quigley. We also have Lisa Madigan, the Attorney General of Illinois. And my former seatmate in Springfield when we were both in the State Senate together, and is doing a terrific job.  And I want to thank David, who I was joking before we came out, is one of the country’s foremost constitutional experts -- and a nice guy. And you guys are lucky to have him. In fact, when I was teaching here I think I stole his Con Law class for a while, and he graciously gave it up because despite the privilege of grading 60 or 70 bluebooks -- he apparently thought it was important for me to have that privilege as well.  The last thing I'll say by way of introduction -- I had a chance to talk to some young people over in the overflow room, mostly students, and I just said to them that having now been in politics for quite some time, seeing what lawyers are capable of doing every single day, working on a whole range of issues that are of huge importance to our democracy and to our society, I hope that all the students here are excited about the incredible changes and good that you are going to be able to do when you get out of here.  I know that sometimes the news feeds cynicism and democracy at this moment seems particularly frustrating.  But each and every day, I see lawyers not that much older than you who are helping young people get an education, are making sure that consumers are protected, are helping to keep America safe, are ensuring that our health care system works for everybody, are helping to preserve the planet and fight against climate change. It is remarkable what you can do with your talents.  And it doesn’t always get a lot of publicity, but you can make a really meaningful difference. So one of the reasons I wanted to come back is to recruit you.  To stay engaged, get involved, make a difference.  It doesn’t mean you have to run for office.  It doesn't mean you have to run for office.  It doesn't mean you even have to work for government.  There are a lot of ways of serving.  But I do hope that one of the things that you will take away from our discussion today and your extraordinary education here at the University of Chicago is the incredible high that you can get from serving this country.
