Well, Nathan, thank you so much for your participation.  I want to thank everybody who’s here in Fort Meade.  There are a couple of people I want to acknowledge. First of all, your Garrison Commander, Colonel Brian Foley.  Where is he?  I just rode over with him.  There he is.  He’s in charge of a lot of stuff.  I was -- with everything that’s going on out of this incredible facility.  Obviously we can’t succeed in our missions without a strong support from Congress, and we’ve got a congressman here who works very hard on behalf of our military and our intelligence -- Congressman Dutch Ruppersberger.  Where’s Dutch?  There he is.  Thank you so much, Dutch. I’m going to be very brief at the front, because I want to mainly take questions from folks not just here but all around the world.  Today is a solemn day.  I started my day commemorating 9/11 and all the people who were killed on that day.  And I’ve had an opportunity as President to meet with many of the survivors, the family members of those who were killed.  And on this particular day, we are constantly reminded of their loss.  We want to let them know that we do not forget those who are fallen.  We are inspired by the survivors, many of whom still have the scars, both seen and unseen, of that terrible, terrible day.  And it’s also a good time to remember all the people who have served and sacrificed since 9/11 in order to keep America safe and free. We have veterans now from every state in the union who have served oftentimes in multiple tours, both in Iraq and Afghanistan.  And although we have made enormous strides in degrading the core al Qaeda, including bin Laden himself that had helped to direct the plot on 9/11, we are well aware of the fact that those threats still exist out there. And here at Fort Meade, we do some of the most important work in helping to coordinate our efforts to make sure that we are bringing to bear all elements of American power against those who would try to do us harm here in the homeland or overseas, or would threaten our allies.  Despite the progress we’ve made in Afghanistan, it’s still critically important that we’ve got thousands of trainers and advisors who are supporting the Afghan military efforts there.  Our combat role is complete, but we still have to make sure that they are getting the kind of help and assistance that they need.  The emergence of ISIL in Iraq and Syria has meant that we have to be present and we are pounding them every single day.  Our airmen are doing extraordinary work with the support of all the other service branches.  And we’re providing training and assistance and support to the Iraqi security forces on the ground as they continue to push back ISIL from territory that they had taken. But both in Iraq and in Syria, in Afghanistan, in North Africa, what we’re very clear about is, is that we still have significant threats coming from terrorist organizations and a terrorist ideology.  We also have the traditional threats that our military has to be prepared for -- from a new Pacific region where historically we have underwritten the security and prosperity of a region that came back after World War II and where we have tremendous alliances, to Europe and our role as the cornerstone of NATO. And so we are going to continually have to work at every level to make sure that our men and women in uniform are provided the strategy they need to succeed, the resources they need to succeed, the equipment, the training.  And in this new era, that’s not just a matter of tanks and rifles; as everybody I think here is aware, especially here at Fort Meade, cybersecurity is opening up a whole new era in which we have to watch out for our adversaries. So on 9/11, I thought it was particularly appropriate for me to be able to address you directly, and to say thank you on behalf of the American people.  When I look out in this audience and when I think about all the members of the armed services all around the world who serve, this represents America.  You’ve got people of every race, religion, faith, every region of the country.  But what we share is a common creed, a common commitment to freedom, a common commitment to rule of law, a common belief that America is an indispensable force for good around the world, and that our military is a linchpin in our ability to project our values alongside our diplomatic efforts, our economy, and the people-to-people relations that helped to spread those core beliefs that all of you are willing to sacrifice for.  So I want to say thank you to you.  I want to especially say thank you to those who are serving overseas and who are watching here today because many of them are away from family right now.  We are grateful for your service.  I don’t have a greater honor than serving as your Commander-in-Chief.  And every single day I see the extraordinary work that you do and I benefit from it as well.
