Good evening, everybody.  Once again, I want to thank the government and the people of Poland for hosting this NATO Summit.  And I especially want to thank the people of Warsaw for their wonderful hospitality.  It is my third visit to Poland.  Each time, we have been received with tremendous friendship, and it signifies the close bonds between our two countries. I want to begin this press conference with events back home. This has been a tough week -- first and foremost, for the families who have been killed, but also for the entire American family.  In my call yesterday to Attorney General Loretta Lynch, I stressed that the Justice Department and our federal government should continue to do everything that we can to assist the investigation in Dallas, and to support the police and the city of Dallas as they deal with this tragedy. In my call to Chief Brown, I commended him for showing outstanding leadership during an extremely challenging time, and asked him to convey to all the officers and their families how the American people are grieving with them and that we stand with them.   I'll have the opportunity to convey our condolences and show our solidarity when I visit Dallas in a few days.  But before I do, let me just make some very brief points.  First of all, as painful as this week has been, I firmly believe that America is not as divided as some have suggested.  Americans of all races and all backgrounds are rightly outraged by the inexcusable attacks on police, whether it's in Dallas or anyplace else. That includes protestors.  It includes family members who have grave concerns about police conduct, and they have said that this is unacceptable.  There's no division there.  And Americans of all races and all backgrounds are also rightly saddened and angered about the deaths of Alton Sterling and Philando Castile, and about the larger, persistent problem of African Americans and Latinos being treated differently in our criminal justice system. So there is sorrow, there is anger, there is confusion about next steps.  But there's unity in recognizing that this is not how we want our communities to operate.  This is not who we want to be as Americans.  And that serves as the basis for us being able to move forward in a constructive and positive way.  So we cannot let the actions of a few define all of us.  The demented individual who carried out those attacks in Dallas, he's no more representative of African Americans than the shooter in Charleston was representative of white Americans, or the shooter in Orlando or San Bernardino were representative of Muslim Americans.  They don't speak for us.  That's not who we are.  And one of the things that gives me hope this week is actually seeing how the overwhelming majority of Americans have reacted -- with empathy and understanding.  We've seen police continue to reach out to communities that they serve all across the country, and show incredible professionalism as they're protecting protestors.  We've seen activists and grassroots groups who have expressed concern about police shootings, but are also adamant in their support of the Dallas Police Department -- which is particularly appropriate because the Dallas Police Department is a great example of a department that has taken the issue of police shootings seriously and has engaged in an approach that has not only brought down their murder rates but also drastically reduced complaints around police misconduct. That's the spirit that we all need to embrace.  That's the spirit that I want to build on.  It's one of the reasons why next week, using the task force that we had set up after Ferguson, but also building on it, and inviting both police and law enforcement and community activists and civil rights leaders, bringing them together to the White House.  I want to start moving on constructive actions that are actually going to make a difference, because that is what all Americans want.   So when we start suggesting that somehow there's this enormous polarization, and we're back to the situation in the '60s -- that's just not true.  You're not seeing riots, and you're not seeing police going after people who are protesting peacefully.  You've seen almost uniformly peaceful protests.  And you've seen uniformly police handling those protests with professionalism.  And so, as tough, as hard, as depressing as the loss of life was this week, we've got a foundation to build on.  We just have to have to confidence that we can build on those better angels of our nature.  And we have to make sure that all of us step back, do some reflection, and make sure that the rhetoric that we engage in is constructive, and not destructive; that we're not painting anybody with an overly broad brush; that we're not constantly thinking the worst in other people rather than the best.  If we do that, then I'm confident that we will continue to make progress.  Now, here in Europe, this is a pivotal moment for our Alliance.  In the nearly 70 years of NATO, perhaps never have we faced such a range of challenges all at once -- security, humanitarian, political.  NATO nations -- the United States, Canada, France, Belgium, and Turkey -- have endured heinous terrorist attacks directed or inspired by ISIL.  Russia has violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of an independent European nation -- Ukraine -- and engaged in provocative behavior toward NATO allies.  European borders and economies have been tested by millions of migrants fleeing conflicts and depravation.  And the vote in the United Kingdom to leave the EU has raised questions about the future of European integration.  In this challenging moment, I want to take this opportunity to state clearly what will never change -- and that is the unwavering commitment of the United States to the security and defense of Europe, to our transatlantic relationship, to our commitment to our common defense.   And next year will mark the 100th anniversary of the first American troops arriving on European soil in the first world war. And ever since, through two world wars, a long Cold War, and the decades since, generations of Americans have served here for our common security.  In quiet cemeteries, from France to the Netherlands to Italy, Americans still rest where they fell.  Even now, more than 60,000 American military personnel serve in dozens of European countries.  And my point is this:  In good times and in bad, Europe can count on the United States -- always.   Here in Warsaw, we haven’t simply reaffirmed our enduring Article 5 obligations to our common security; we’re moving forward with the most significant reinforcement of our collective defense any time since the Cold War.  First, we’re strengthening NATO’s defense and deterrence posture.  Building on our European Reassurance Initiative -- which has already increased readiness, from the Baltics to the Black Sea -- our Alliance will enhance our forward presence on our eastern flank.  As I announced yesterday, the United States will be the lead nation here in Poland, deploying a battalion of American soldiers.  The United Kingdom will take the lead in Estonia, Germany in Lithuania, and Canada in Latvia.  This will mean some 4,000 additional NATO troops, on a rotational basis, in this region.  Moreover, the additional U.S. Armored Brigade will rotate through Europe, including an additional 4,000 U.S. troops. Meanwhile, to the south, we agreed on new deterrence measures in Romania and Bulgaria.  So NATO is sending a clear message that we will defend every ally. We’re also strengthening the readiness of our forces against a range of threats.  So NATO’s joint task force is now operational and can deploy anywhere in Europe on short notice.  With recent progress here in Poland, Romania and Spain, NATO's ballistic missile defense is coming online.  And we're launching a new effort to boost the resilience of allies to better defend against new types of threats, including cyberattacks. NATO is increasing our support to Ukraine.  At our meeting of the NATO-Ukraine Commission, we agreed on a new assistance package to improve Alliance support for Ukrainian forces.  Prime Minister Cameron, President Hollande, Chancellor Merkel, Prime Minister Renzi and I met with President Poroshenko, and we reaffirmed our strong support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the need to continue political and economic reforms.  Thank you.  I'm already getting applause.  I'm not even finished yet. And even as the NATO-Russia Council will meet in Brussels next week, our 28 nations are united in our view that there can be no business as usual with Russia until it fully implements its Minsk obligations.    NATO will do more also to fight against terrorist networks. Every ally already contributes to the campaign against ISIL.  Now, the Alliance will contribute AWACS aircraft to improve our intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance against ISIL.  NATO training of Iraqi security forces, currently run in Jordan, will move to Iraq, where they can be even more effective.  And building on my decision to largely maintain the current U.S. troop presence in Afghanistan into next year, 39 nations, including the U.S., have committed more than 12,000 troops to NATO’s training mission.  And, in addition, some 30 nations have pledged upwards of $900 million to help sustain Afghan forces -- which is a very strong message of our enduring commitment to Afghanistan. We’re bolstering our efforts on NATO’s southern flank.  The Alliance will increase our support to EU naval operations in the Mediterranean to stop arms traffickers and go after criminals that are exploiting desperate migrants.  And we’re going to do more to help partners from North Africa to the Middle East to Georgia strengthen their own defense capacity. And, finally, after many years, NATO has stopped the collective decline in defense spending.  Over the past two years, most NATO members have halted cuts and begun investing more in defense.  And this means defense spending across the Alliance is now scheduled to increase.  I especially want to commend our friends in the UK, Poland, Greece, Estonia -- all who, along with the United States, pay their full share of at least 2 percent of GDP for our collective defense.  But for those of you doing the math, that means that the majority of allies are still not hitting that 2 percent mark -- an obligation we agreed to in Wales.  So we had a very candid conversation about this.  There’s a recognition that given the range of threats that we face and the capabilities that we need, everybody has got to step up and everybody has got to do better. So, in closing, I'd just note that this is my final NATO Summit.  Throughout my time in office, one of my top foreign policy priorities has been to strengthen our alliances, especially with NATO.  And as I reflect on the past eight years  -- both the progress and the challenges -- I can say with confidence that we’ve delivered on that promise.  The United States has increased our presence here in Europe.  NATO is as strong, as nimble, and as ready as ever.  And as we see from the presence of Montenegro at this summit, the door to NATO membership remains open to nations that can meet our high standards.  So nobody should ever doubt the resolve of this Alliance to stay united and focused on the future.  And just as our nations have stood together over the past hundred years, I know that we’ll stay united and grow even stronger for another hundred more.
