Good afternoon, everybody.  Let me begin by once again thanking the government and the people of Malaysia for hosting us at the U.S.-ASEAN and East Asia Summits.  These gatherings are enormous undertakings, but thanks to Malaysia’s leadership and incredible hospitality, they have been a great success. Earlier this week, as I headed to this region, there was a headline in one of our publications back home that asked -- “Obama’s Asian Distraction?” And the premise seemed to be that this region was somehow disconnected from pressing global events. I could not disagree more.  This region is not a distraction from the world’s central challenges, like terrorism.  The Asia Pacific is absolutely critical to promoting security, prosperity and human dignity around the world.  That’s why I’ve devoted so much of my foreign policy to deepening America’s engagement with this region.  And I’m pleased that on this trip we made progress across the board.  With my fellow leaders from Japan, Australia and the Philippines, I reaffirmed that our treaty alliances remain the foundation of regional security.  The United States is boosting our support for the Philippines' maritime capabilities and those of our regional partners.  At the U.S.-ASEAN and East Asia Summits, a key topic was the South China Sea, and many leaders spoke about the need to uphold international principles, including the freedom of navigation and overflight and the peaceful resolution of disputes.  And to make sure we keep deepening our partnership here in Southeast Asia, I invited all 10 ASEAN leaders to the United States next year.  I’m pleased they accepted, and I look forward to continuing our work. On the economic front, we worked with our APEC partners to advance a regional economic order where all nations play by the same set of rules.  Based on my meeting with our Trans-Pacific Partnership countries, I am optimistic that our 12 nations will approve this pact and that we can increasingly focus on implementing it.   APEC joined the G20 in sending an unequivocal message that we need to reach an ambitious climate change agreement in Paris. I also want to note the landmark step we took this week with more than 30 other nations at the OECD to dramatically reduce subsidies for coal-fired power plants around the world -- which is an important way to advance the fight against climate change.     Of course, given the events of this week, much of my work here in Asia focused on the urgent threat of terrorism.  Today, families in too many nations are grieving the senseless loss of their loved ones in the attacks in France and in Mali.  As Americans, we remember Nohemi Gonzalez, who was just 23 years old, a design major from California State University.  She was in Paris to pursue her dream of designing innovations that would improve the lives of people around the world.  And we remember Anita Datar of Maryland.  She’s a veteran of the Peace Corps, a mother to her young son, who devoted her life to helping the world’s poor, including women and girls in Mali, lift themselves up with health and education.   Nohemi and Anita embodied the values of service and compassion that no terrorist can extinguish.  Their legacy will endure in the family and friends who carry on their work.  They remind me of my daughters, or my mother, who, on the one hand, had their whole life ahead of them, and on the other hand, had devoted their lives to helping other people.  And it is worth us remembering when we look at the statistics that there are beautiful, wonderful lives behind the terrible death tolls that we see in these places.  Over the years, our friends here in Asia have been victims of terrorism, and many of them are close counterterrorism partners with us.  So my time here has also been an opportunity to work with many of our partners in the Asia Pacific that are members of our coalition against ISIL -- Australia, Canada, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan. Which brings me to the point I want to emphasize today.  For more than a year, the United States has built and led a broad coalition against ISIL of some 65 nations.  Given the frequent focus on America’s leadership of this campaign, sometimes the contributions of our partners are overlooked.  In fact, since the G20, a number of our coalition members have stepped up with new commitments.  So today I want to take a moment to recognize how our allies and partners help advance every element of our strategy.   Nearly two dozen nations -- among them Turkey and our Arab partners -- contribute in some way to the military campaign, which has taken more than 8,000 strikes against ISIL so far.  And as I’ve said, we’re ready to welcome or cooperate with other countries that are determined to truly fight ISIL as well.  Fifteen countries have deployed personnel to train and support local forces in Iraq.  The United Arab Emirates and Germany are organizing 25 coalition partners in helping to stabilize areas in Iraq liberated from ISIL.  Italy is coordinating the multinational effort to train Iraqi police.   On the political front, U.S. leadership brought all the key countries together in the Vienna to discuss a common understanding on the principles for ending the Syrian civil war. On the humanitarian front, the United States is helping to lead the effort to mobilize more aid for the Syrian people, including refugees.     More than 40 countries have now passed or strengthened laws to prevent the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, and 34 nations, including the United States, have arrested foreign terrorist fighters.  Saudi Arabia is helping to coordinate the crackdown on ISIL financing.  The United Arab Emirates’ new messaging center is working to discredit ISIL’s propaganda, and Malaysia just announced the creation of its own center to do the same.  And by joining our summit at the United Nations that we organized this fall, more than 100 nations, more than 20 multilateral institutions and some 120 civil society groups -- including many leaders from Muslim communities around the world -- have become part of a global movement against ISIL and its twisted ideology. All of which is to say that our coalition will not relent.  We will not accept the idea that terrorist assaults on restaurants and theaters and hotels are the new normal -- or that we are powerless to stop them.  After all, that’s precisely what terrorists like ISIL want, because, ultimately, that’s the only way that they can win.  That’s the very nature of terrorism --they can’t beat us on the battlefield, so they try to terrorize us into being afraid, into changing our patterns of behavior, into panicking, into abandoning our allies and partners, into retreating from the world.  And as President, I will not let that happen.     In our diverse societies, everybody can do their part.  And we will not give in to fear, or start turning on each other, or treating some people differently because of religion or race or background.  That wouldn’t just be a betrayal of our values, it would also feed ISIL’s propaganda -- there assertion, which is absolutely false, that we must absolutely reject, that we are somehow at war with an entire religion.  The United States could never be at war with any religion because America is made up of multiple religions.  We're strengthened by people from every religion, including Muslim Americans.   So I want to be as clear as I can on this:  Prejudice and discrimination helps ISIL and undermines our national security.  And so, even as we destroy ISIL on the battlefield -- and we will destroy them -- we will take back land that they are currently in.  We will cut off their financing.  We will hunt down their leadership.  We will dismantle their networks and their supply lines, and we will ultimately destroy them.  Even as we are in the process of doing that, we want to make sure that we don't lose our own values and our own principles.  And we can all do our part by upholding the values of tolerance and diversity and equality that help keep America strong.   The United States will continue to lead this global coalition.  We are intensifying our strategy on all fronts, with local partners on the ground.  We are going to keep on rolling back ISIL in Iraq and in Syria, and take out more of their leaders and commanders so that they do not threaten us.  And we will destroy this terrorist organization.   And we’ll keep working with our allies and partners for the opportunity and justice that helps defeat violent extremism.  We’ll keep standing up for the human rights and dignity of all people -- because that is contrary to what these terrorists believe.  That's part of how we defeat them.  And I'm confident we will succeed.  The hateful vision of an organization like ISIL is no match for the strength of nations and people around the world who are united to live in security and peace and in harmony.
