Hello, Henderson!  Thank you!  Thank you so much, everybody.  Everybody, have a seat, have a seat.  I am thrilled to be here. I love you back. We've got some special guests here -- everybody is a special guest, but I just want to acknowledge a few folks here.  Secretary of State Ross Miller in the house.  Two outstanding members of Congress -- Representative Shelley Berkley -- and your own Dina Titus. Senate Majority Leader Steven Horsford. We've got State Assembly Majority Leader John Oceguera.  Clark County Commissioner Chairman Rory Reid.  Henderson Mayor Andy Hafen. Former Governor Bob Miller. We've got -- first, can everybody give a huge round of applause for Tina Long for the great introduction of Harry Reid?  Green Valley High School principal Jeff Horn. Obviously not exam time yet. Get's a standing "O." The Green Valley High School Marching Band that played at my inauguration -- give them a big round of applause.  They played "Viva Las Vegas."  At the reviewing stand -- they did. And finally, he may have already been acknowledged -- I want to give a special acknowledgment to Greg Koehler, North Las Vegas Fire Department, who just returned from 14 days in Haiti giving medical assistance to orphans. Thank you. We're proud of you.  Thank you. Now, it's good to be back in Nevada -- good to be back in Vegas. Good to be back in Henderson.And good to be with my good friend, your great senator, Harry Reid. I understand Henderson is where Harry went to school as a boy and fought in the ring as an amateur boxer.  Now, looking at Harry, you wouldn't say that -- I mean, let's face it -- but I can personally attest that Harry Reid is one of the toughest people I know.  He does not give up.  He knows what he cares about.  He knows what he believes in and he's willing to fight for it.  And sometimes he takes his licks, but he gets back up.  Harry Reid has never stopped fighting -- he hasn’t stopped fighting for Henderson; he hasn’t stopped fighting for Nevada; he has not stopped fighting for the United States of America and middle-class families all across this country that need a fair shake. I'm looking forward to hearing what's on your minds and trying to answer a few questions.  But before I do, let me say a few words about the situation that folks are facing right now.  Harry is not one for sugarcoating things -- I don't know if you noticed that.  He's kind of a blunt guy.  Neither am I.  These are tough times.  When President Kennedy was here, he called Henderson a "city of destiny" because he saw its potential as Las Vegas grew.  But for too long, I know many of you have felt like your destiny has been slipping beyond your control.  You don't need me to tell you that.  All of you in some way have felt this recession.  You felt it in the tourism and hospitality industry.  You felt it in the construction industry.  The unemployment rate here is 13 percent, which is the second highest in the nation.  Foreclosures are also among the highest.  Home values have fallen by more than almost anyplace else.  And this is after a decade when, for most middle-class families, incomes actually shrank and wages flat-lined, and the only thing rising faster was medical costs and the cost of education.  So I know it's tough out there.  Harry Reid knows it's tough out there.  That's why we asked you to send us to Washington.  We didn't run for the fancy title or a big desk or a comfy chair.  We didn't run because it was fun to get your name in the newspapers -- most of the time, it's not.  We didn't run so a bunch of folks on cable TV could chatter about you.  And we didn't run to kick our problems down the road.  We ran to solve problems that folks like you are facing every single day.  That's why we ran for office.  That's why Harry wanted to be Majority Leader, and that's why I wanted to be President of the United States -- to help you. When my Administration took office, our immediate mission was clear.  We needed to stop the great recession from turning into a great depression.  And economists of every stripe were warning that was a real possibility.  And that meant that we had to make some decisions swiftly, boldly, and not always popular, but decisions that were necessary.  It wasn't a time for satisfying the politics of the moment, it wasn't time for just playing to the cameras -- it was time for doing what was right. That's why we helped stabilize our financial system -- not because we felt any compassion for big banks, but because not doing so would have endangered the savings and dreams of millions more Americans. And by the way, I was committed to ensuring that if taxpayers were going to provide temporary assistance to keep our financial system afloat, then it actually had to be temporary.  And I was determined to get back every single dime, and we are well on our way to doing that -- getting back every single dime from those banks. In fact, one battle we're having right now is we think the largest banks should be assessed a fee so that taxpayers are held harmless for the assistance that you've been giving.  As you might imagine, the banks are not enthusiastic about that.  And it won't surprise you to learn that they've got a few friends in Congress who are willing to go along, but you know Harry Reid is not one of those folks who are willing to go along.  We're going to get your money back because Harry Reid is going to make sure you get your money back. We helped shore up the American auto industry.  That wasn't popular.  I understood why.  Folks felt like these companies should reap the consequences of bad management decisions in the past, just like any other company would.  But if we had let GM and Chrysler go under, it would have been hundreds of thousands of hardworking Americans who paid the price -- not just folks at those companies themselves, but at suppliers and dealers all across the country.  So we told them, if you're willing to take the tough and painful steps you make -- that are needed for you to become more competitive, then we're willing to invest in your future.  And as a result, auto production in the United States of America is up 69 percent from the first three months of 2009.  GM's CEO recently said that the company would repay $6.7 billion in loans from taxpayers -- with interest -- by June of this year. Now, one of the things you need to know is that the steps we've taken to shore up the banks and the autos, they have nothing to do with the Recovery Act.  Those were separate.  We had to do those as emergency measures.  And I just want to point this out -- Harry Reid, he's got his pollsters; I've got my pollsters.  We knew that this wasn't going to be popular.  But we did it because it was the right thing to do. So it's also why we passed the Recovery Act.  Now, a lot of people think that the stimulus package, the Recovery Act -- if you listen on television, you'd think, well, that's all about giving banks money.  That has nothing to do with the banks.  The other week, I saw a poll that said Americans, they don't like the Recovery Act -- they just like all the individual parts of the Recovery Act. And the reason is, they think the Recovery Act is for banks and auto companies.  When you ask folks about what was actually in the Recovery Act, they think it's full of good ideas -- like tax cuts, like infrastructure investment, like unemployment relief.  That's what the Recovery Act was.  It was tax cuts for small business owners and 95 percent of you.  You may not have noticed -- 95 percent of you got a tax cut -- because of Harry Reid and because of the Recovery Act. One million people in the state of Nevada.  We expanded unemployment insurance at a time when it was absolutely vital for people as they were trying to stay afloat. More than a quarter-million of your members -- of your neighbors.  It was jobs for construction workers and jobs for cops and firemen, jobs for almost 2,000 education professionals right here in Nevada.  I haven't talked to the principal, but I guarantee you, we would have seen some very difficult decisions having to be made about maintaining teachers right here at Green Valley, if it hadn't been for the help that Harry Reid provided last year. You would have seen some very tough choices. All of this -- from the tax cuts to the unemployment insurance to the jobs -- that was only possible because of Harry's leadership.  And as a result, our economy is growing again.  Almost two million Americans who would  otherwise be employed are working right now -- because of what Harry Reid did.  We're no longer staring into an economic abyss -- because of what Harry Reid helped to do.  Now, he and I both know that's little comfort to the seven million Americans who lost their job in this recession.  It's little comfort to homeowners who are facing foreclosure or steep declines in their home values, or to students who are having to delay their college plans because they can't afford it, or older folks who are postponing retirement. That's why I'm not going to rest.  That's not -- why we're not done.  That's why Harry Reid isn't going to rest until all of America is working again, until the dream of home ownership is secure once again, and until our economy is benefiting not just Wall Street but benefiting hardworking Nevada families, benefiting the middle class, benefiting Americans all across this great country of ours.  That's what we are aiming to do.  Now, I've said before that the way I measure our economy's strength -- the way you measure it -- is by whether jobs and wages and incomes are growing.  But the other way we measure is by whether families have a roof over their heads and whether folks are living out that American Dream of owning a home.  That dream has been jeopardized in this recession for a lot of people, especially right here in Nevada.  Now, part of it was -- I've got to be blunt here, I got to be honest -- part of it was because too many lenders were focused on making a quick buck instead of acting responsibly. And, if we're honest, too many borrowers acted irresponsibly at certain points, taking on mortgages that they knew they couldn't afford. And what happened was the regulators in Washington and legislators too often turned a blind eye to the excesses and the failures on Wall Street that fed a housing bubble.  And now that that bubble has burst, it's left devastation that we're still grappling with today.  Now, government has a responsibility to help deal with this problem.  Government can't solve this problem alone.  We got to be honest about that.  Government alone can't solve this problem.  And it shouldn't.  But government can make a difference.  It can't stop every foreclosure, and tax dollars shouldn't be used to reward the very irresponsible lenders and borrowers who helped bring about the housing crisis.  But what we can do is help families who've done everything right stay in their homes whenever possible.  What we can do is stabilize the housing market so that home values can begin rising again.  And that's why we're buying up vacant homes and converting them into affordable housing -- creating jobs, stemming our housing crisis, growing the local economy.  That's why last year, we put a tax credit worth thousands of dollars into the pocket of 1.4 million Americans to help them buy their first home -- first-time homebuyers credit. That's why we're offering over one million struggling homeowners lower monthly payments through our loan modification initiative.  And that's why today, thanks to the leadership of Harry Reid, I'm announcing a $1.5 billion fund for housing finance agencies in the states that are hardest hit by this housing crisis -- and that means here in Nevada.  Right here in Nevada. So this fund is going to help out-of-work homeowners avoid preventable foreclosures, and it will help homeowners who owe more than their homes are worth find a way to pay their mortgages that works for both the borrowers and the lenders alike, and will help folks who've taken out a second mortgage modify their loans.       So, yes, we need to strengthen our housing market.  And we need to focus on job creation and getting our economy moving again.  But one last thing I want to be clear about -- we can do all those things, dealing with sort of the emergency crisis, and still fall behind in the 21st century, in this global economy, unless we recommit ourselves to solving some of the long-term problems that have been with us for years.  We've got to recognize, just like earlier generations, that our future is what we make of it, and unless we give everything we've got to securing America's success in the 21st century, our children aren’t going to have the same opportunities.  Now, I've traveled a lot over the last year, all over the world, and I've got to tell you, countries like China  -- they're competing to win.  And there's nothing wrong with that.  We want China to succeed.  They've got a lot of poverty, much more poverty than we have here, and it's good for their stability if they're doing well.  But I don't know about you -- I don't intend to cede the 21st century to anybody else. America is not a nation that follows -- America leads.  That's what I intend for us to do once again.  America leads.    So what does it mean to lead?  It means countries that out-educate us today are going to out-compete us tomorrow.  And that means America has to lead in education.  That's why we're working with educators to transform our schools, and make college more affordable, and prepare our kids for science and engineering and technical degrees -- because those are going to be the jobs of the future.  And because the future belongs to countries that create the jobs of tomorrow, we've got to lead in energy.  That's why we're investing in companies right here in Nevada and across this nation that produce solar power and wind power and the smart, energy-efficient electric grids  -- the investments that are giving rise to a clean energy economy.  It's vital that we do that.     Our nation can't lead, we can't prosper, if we've got a broken-down health care system that works better for the insurance companies than it does for ordinary Americans. And we can't squander the opportunity to reform our health care system to make it work for everybody.  That's why this coming week I'm going to be meeting, and Harry is going to be meeting, with members of both parties and both chambers -- we're going to move forward the Democratic proposal; we hope the Republicans have one, too.  And we'll sit down and let's hammer it out, go -- we'll go section by section. Because America can't solve our economic problems unless we tackle some of these structural problems.  And America can't lead -- we can't succeed unless we're also getting a handle on our debt.  We've got to confront this fiscal crisis that has been brewing for years.  That's why we're cutting what we don't need to pay for what we do.  That's why I signed a law that says Americans should pay as we go and live within our means. That's why yesterday I announced a bipartisan fiscal commission that will help us meet our fiscal challenges once and for all. Fiscal responsibility.  Clean energy.  A world-class education.  A health care system that works.  An economy that lifts up all our citizens.  That's how America can lead.  That's how the future will be won -- with all of us coming together to win it -- Democrats and Republicans alike.  And independents.  With all the petty partisanship and game-playing in Washington, I know that sometimes you guys can feel pretty frustrated. I know it can be easy to despair about whether we, as a nation, can come together anymore.  But for those who wonder if America can unite, just come to Henderson.  You think about it.  This is a town that was founded during World War II to supply metal for planes, for guns, for the arsenal of democracy that freed the world from tyranny.  This is a town -- it wasn’t built by liberals or conservatives; it was built by Americans, by patriots who rallied around a common purpose in an hour of need.  And I'm certain that if we can reclaim in this country the spirit of unity that built Henderson, Nevada, all those years ago, then we can build cities of destiny across this country.  And the future will belong to the United States of America. Thank you. God bless you. God bless the United States of America. Thank you.  Thank you.   All right, everybody sit down.  This is the -- Here's where I'm on the hot seat, so I've got to take off my jacket.  Answer some questions.  Everybody sit down.  All right.  Some of you have been to town halls before, so this is pretty straightforward.  We've got people in the audience with mics, and just raise your hand -- we're going to go girl, boy, girl, boy -- make sure it's fair.  And I'm going to try to take as many questions as I can in the time remaining.  And when you -- before you answer your question, if you can introduce yourself so that we know who you are.  And try to make your question relatively brief so that we can get in as many as possible.
