Conrad Istanbul Istanbul, Turkey 11:30 A.M. (Local) MR. McCLELLAN: All right, good morning. This is a background briefing of senior administration officials, and I'll just turn it over to the senior administration official to give you kind of -- White House and administration perspective on today's events. SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Good morning, everybody. I will start by discussing -- obviously, you received the news by now. So as the President has said, and as the administration has said going back over the course of the last several weeks, and particularly after the new Iraqi government was formed, that our goal was to move as quickly as possible to enable the new Iraqi government to assume as much responsibility for the day-to-day affairs of the Iraqi people as possible. We also said that we expected the enemy in Iraq to continue to try to inflict harm and violence on innocent Iraqi civilians, as well as the multinational forces on the ground. As you have witnessed, and as the world has witnessed, the new Iraqi government has moved at warp-speed in taking control of its own government. The ministries were being handed over on a very robust pace, based upon their capabilities. Thursday of last week, they assumed control of the last ministry, so all the ministries, as of last Thursday, were under the operational control and day-to-day affairs of the new Iraqi government. Prime Minister Allawi, himself, has demonstrated his capabilities as the new Iraqi leader in charge of this government, his determination to fight the terrorist enemy within his country, and his eagerness to assume control of his control in order to improve the lives of the Iraqi people, as well as to continue to fight the terrorist threat within his country. The administration has been in communication with Baghdad for several days -- I would say over a week -- about the concept or the idea of handing sovereignty over ahead of schedule. This was based upon two factors, one, were they ready, and, B, taking into consideration the security environment in the country. Prime Minister Allawi strongly advised us that today would be the right day to do it. He made a final decision last night, based on my understanding, and which was communicated, obviously, to Ambassador Bremer, which was then communicated to the administration. The President was informed during the day that these conversations were going on. Obviously, he knew about the possibility of this happening for several days, but he received confirmation that Prime Minister Allawi was making the recommendation to do so ahead of schedule. And the main reason that Prime Minister Allawi gave is that he believes it would strengthen his hand in dealing with the terrorist threat in his country and that it would demonstrate to the Iraqi people that the -- and to the world, that this new government is capable, willing, and ready to run their country, to improve the daily lives of the Iraqi people, and to improve the security environment in their country. So the President was pleased with the news, because it does demonstrate that this new Iraqi government was ahead of schedule and fully capable of taking charge, that it shows a seriousness of the new Iraqi government has in focusing on the terrorist threat. As many of you know, this -- the multinational forces, in particular our forces, are in Iraq to help them fight this enemy. That relationship was borne out and the agreements made between the Iraqi government and the new -- and the multinational force, also memorialized in the U.N. Security Council resolution that was passed. As we talked about the deliberations today, the international community, once again, is demonstrating its support and commitment to the new Iraqi government by providing training of security forces through the NATO Alliance. So these are positive developments, and today's news is great news for the Iraqi people. And President Bush is pleased with the work and sacrifice made by all those members of the coalition who have helped bring this day about. He is particularly thankful, and thankful on behalf of a grateful nation, of the work of Ambassador Bremer, who has, through his tireless work, has helped make the daily lives of the Iraqi people better.
