James S. Brady Press Briefing Room  12:50 P.M. EST  MR. FLEISCHER: Good afternoon. Let me give you a report on the President's day, and then I have a statement by the President I'd like to read. The President began this morning with a phone call to the President-elect Roh Moo-Hyun of South Korea. The President called President-elect Roh to extend his warm congratulations on Mr. Roh's victory in South Korea's December 19th presidential election. The President and the President-elect agreed to work closely together to promote peace on the Korean Peninsula and to further strengthen the U.S.-South Korean alliance.  President-elect Roh accepted President Bush's invitation to visit Washington at his earliest convenience. In the meantime, the President and the President-elect discussed the possibility of sending senior representatives to each other's capitals to address issues of mutual concern. The President and the President-elect exchanged warm holiday greetings to each other and to the families of both nations and people.  The President, after that, had his usual round of intelligence briefings this morning, followed by FBI briefing. Then he convened a meeting of the National Security Council. The President, as we speak, is having his regular lunch with the Vice President. And then this afternoon the President looks forward to meeting with the Quartet, a group of leaders to discuss the path of making progress in the Middle East. The President remains firmly committed to his position that a two-state solution of an Israel that can live in security, along with a state of Palestine side by side is the only viable solution to find lasting peace in the Middle East.  And finally, I'd like to read a statement by the President: I respect the very difficult decision Trent has made on behalf of the American people. As Majority and Minority Leader of the Senate, Trent Lott improved education for the American people; he led the way in securing tax relief; he strengthened our national security; and he stood for a bold and effective foreign policy.  Trent is a valued friend and a man I respect. I am pleased he will continue to serve our nation in the Senate, and I look forward to working with him on our agenda to make America safer, stronger, and better.  
