President Obama poked fun at himself, Congress, the Secret Service, the media and particularly his rival Mitt Romney on Saturday night, mocking his Republican opponent as a fuddy-duddy rich guy who travels with his dog in a cage strapped to the roof of the family car.

Delivering the traditionally comic remarks at the annual White House Correspondents' Association dinner, the president seemed to enjoy needling Mr. Romney just days after the general election contest effectively got underway. The highlight was a spoof Romney ad showing the former governor at the door of Air Force One with a dog cage on top of the aircraft.

Families are off limits, Mr. Obama declared. "Dogs, however, are apparently fair game," he said.

Mr. Obama pointed out that he was speaking in a cavernous hotel ballroom, or "what Mitt Romney would call a little fixer-upper." He noted that he and Mr. Romney both have degrees from Harvard University, but the Republican has two. "What a snob," Mr. Obama joked. And he said after his own appearance on Jimmy Fallon's show this week, Mr. Romney "asked if he could get some equal time on 'The Merv Griffin Show.' "

Appearing before the official entertainer of the evening, Jimmy Kimmel, Mr. Obama also took aim at a couple of other Republican critics. Noting the presence of Newt Gingrich, who plans to drop out of the Republican race next week, Mr. Obama called out, "Newt there's still time, man!"

And he took aim at Sarah Palin, mocking her famous line from the 2008 convention as well as Republican criticism of him for eating dog meat while a boy in Indonesia. "What's the difference between a hockey mom and a pit bull?" Mr. Obama asked. "A pit bull is delicious." (Even Michelle Obama looked askance at that one.)

He took a jab at Congress, thanking lawmakers who "took a break from their exhausting schedule of not passing any laws to be here tonight." He teased Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, who was photographed dancing and drinking a beer at a club during a visit to Colombia. "She won't stop drunk-texting me from Cartagena," the president said.

And of course, he ribbed his own security detail after the prostitution scandal involving the Secret Service on that same trip to Colombia, declaring that he had to leave early because "I have to get the Secret Service home in time for their new curfew."

Mr. Kimmel also went after the Secret Service during his routine. "I do have a lot of jokes about the Secret Service," he said. "You know, I told them for $800 I wouldn't tell them, but they only offered 30."

The dinner has long since morphed from a gathering of journalists and their sources into a peculiar ritual marrying Washington, New York and Hollywood cultures and celebrities.

In addition to the president and the usual array of cabinet secretaries, senators, House members and television pundits, boldfaced names spotted at this year's dinner included George Clooney, Lindsay Lohan, Goldie Hawn, Claire Danes, Kim Kardashian, Diane Keaton and others.

Just last year, the dinner played a cameo role in the raid that led to the death of Osama bin Laden. When he showed up at the dinner, Mr. Obama had just given the order for the helicopter incursion into Pakistan to burst into a compound where the Al Qaeda leader was suspected of living. But he smiled and joked his way through the dinner, and a ballroom full of journalists had no clue what was about to happen.