Barack Obama took the dais as the keynote speaker at the Democratic convention here on Tuesday and told a classic American story of immigration, hope, striving and opportunity. He did not speak of race or civil rights or a struggle for equality. He did not speak, as the Rev. Jesse Jackson did so passionately in 1996, of the legacy of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and a black America still in despair.

Instead, Mr. Obama, a black state senator from Illinois who is running for the United States Senate, spoke of "one people, all of us pledging allegiance to the stars and stripes, all of us defending the United States of America."

He drew rousing applause, and tears in some cases, for lines like, "There's not a liberal America and a conservative America. There's the United States of America."

For some black delegates and elected officials, Mr. Obama's optimistic theme of one America -- for Arab-Americans and Latinos, red states and blue states -- was entirely appropriate. Many of his listeners here tonight said they could not help but feel pride that Mr. Obama could become the only black member of the Senate and the third since Reconstruction.

"I think he is going to be a star in the Democratic Party," said Frederick Young, a member of the Illinois delegation. "I am proud, as a black man, to see him give a speech like the one he gave. It was inspirational."

But for some an equally compelling feature is that Mr. Obama could help the Democrats win a majority in the Senate. And many black delegates are so eager to defeat President Bush and the Republicans this year that they have embraced the theme of unity and optimism imposed by Democratic leaders and put aside their intraparty struggles of the past.

"What you're seeing is a maturation of the African-American vote and presence in the party," said Alexis M. Herman, the secretary of labor in the Clinton administration and a senior adviser to Senator John Kerry. "We're at the table and helping to shape the agenda as opposed to being on the outside trying to get in."

Four years ago, the keynote speaker, Representative Harold E. Ford Jr. of Tennessee, was also black. Mr. Ford, who gave a fairly innocuous speech, was overshadowed by Mr. Jackson and the party's black caucus, who pointedly questioned the commitment of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the vice-presidential nominee, to affirmative action and public education.

The message of Mr. Obama was quite different. The son of a black man who grew up in Kenya herding goats and a white woman from Kansas, he said his parents shared "an abiding faith in the possibilities of this nation."

Mr. Obama, 42, went on to study at Columbia and was the first black president of The Harvard Law Review. He scored a stunning victory in the March Democratic primary in Illinois, facing six opponents and still winning 53 percent of the vote. His Republican opponent, under fire, dropped out and has not been replaced.

"I stand here knowing that my story is part of the larger American story," he said.

Some in the audience said Mr. Obama, who is married and has two daughters, had immediately risen to star status in a party eager for one.

"His story symbolizes the country's opportunities," said Tom J. Troetti, a delegate from New York. "Based on that speech, he now personifies this party's future."

There is already greater-than-usual enthusiasm among black delegates here. Walter Johnson, 49, a postal worker from Visalia, Calif., said he was so energized to work for Mr. Kerry that he would try to drum up voter support when he returned home "by walking the street, by knocking on doors, and by phone banking."

"To those that I reach," Mr. Johnson said, "I'm going to say, 'Hey, get your family members, get your friends. This is important."'

Representative Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of New York, said that many blacks were motivated by the disputed vote in Florida in 2000.

"Black folks started campaigning against Bush right after the last election was stolen," Mr. Rangel said. "You put out the word to the black man and say 'Don't forget Florida,' you are putting out the most powerful message that we can put out politically."

Mr. Kerry chose Mr. Obama to deliver the keynote address long before Mr. Bush asked black voters last week to consider voting Republican.

Some said they were insulted by Mr. Bush's pitch.

"African-Americans are smart," said Mayor Douglas Palmer of Trenton, the president of the National Conference of Mayors. "They realize that we have given the Republican Party a chance going all the way back to Abraham Lincoln."

Some said the Democratic Party had achieved a level of equilibrium, where its message could speak to both its most loyal constituency and swing voters. As Mr. Obama himself said earlier to black delegates here, "Democrats succeed when they reach out to other people but don't forget the base."

He sought to do just that in his speech on Tuesday, as he addressed "Democrats, Republicans, Independents" and talked about jobs, the high cost of health care and college tuition, the needs of veterans, and the imperative to "never ever go to war without enough troops to win the war."

David Bositis, a research associate at the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies in Washington, said Democrats were in agreement on issues, and as such should focus on getting blacks to the polls. Mr. Bositis noted that blacks made up a significant percentage of the vote in several of the contested states, including Florida, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio and Pennsylvania.

Stephanie Cutter, a spokesman for Mr. Kerry, said, "By conducting this type of convention the way we have and by striving for a convention that reflects America, we're showing that we aren't taking anything for granted."