They came from across the country, some arriving before dawn, carrying folding chairs, cameras and a strong, proud sense of history. Thousands stood and sat together under a bright blue sky Sunday as a memorial to the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. -- the first honoring an African-American in the area of the Mall -- was dedicated at last.

The morning ceremony, which ended with a speech by President Obama, took the audience back through 48 years of history, to 1963 and a defining moment for the civil rights movement, when Dr. King led the March on Washington and gave his "I Have a Dream" speech on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.

Mr. Obama is a direct beneficiary of the civil rights movement, a point he has made in past speeches. And at times Sunday, when he spoke of Dr. King's struggles, it was easy for many to think that the president was speaking of himself.

"For every victory, there were setbacks," he said. "Even after winning the Nobel Peace Prize, Dr. King was vilified by many."

Before Mr. Obama spoke, a star-studded list of other speakers -- including Dr. King's children, civil rights leaders like Jesse Jackson and Representative John Lewis, and performers including Aretha Franklin and Stevie Wonder -- invoked Dr. King's principles of social justice. Calling them all the more relevant today, at a time of economic hardship and growing inequality, the speakers implored the crowd to apply them.

"We should never adjust to 1 percent of the people controlling 40 percent of the wealth," said Bernice King, Dr. King's daughter. "I hear my father say, 'We must have a radical revolution of values and reordering of priorities of this nation.' "

The audience, which was overwhelmingly black, cheered its approval, the heads a sea of white baseball caps, which had been handed out at the entrance, interrupted by the occasional Sunday hat.

"I'm so happy. Aren't you happy?" said Pat Harris, 53, clad in a purple sweat suit and a white vest and dancing in the grass to Mr. Wonder's music shortly after the president's speech.

Ms. Harris grew up in poverty and segregation in the Mississippi Delta town of Belzoni, she said. Now she is a federal employee in Washington, where, she said, she lives better than her parents did, progress that she credits to Dr. King.

"We stand here today, economically O.K., because of that man," she said.

The memorial -- a four-acre tract along the Tidal Basin that is dotted with elms and cherry trees and anchored by an imposing granite statue of Dr. King -- is the product of more than two decades of work. It was conceived in 1983 by members of Dr. King's fraternity, Alpha Phi Alpha, and authorized by Congress in 1996.

It was originally scheduled to be dedicated in August to coincide with the 48th anniversary of the March on Washington, but Hurricane Irene intervened.

The monument to Dr. King is the first to a black man on the Mall, ,heightening the emotion for visitors. His stone figure faces the Jefferson Memorial across the water. Lincoln is at his back, and Roosevelt to his right.

"This is just wonderful. It's a thrill," said Hattie Jones from Arlington, Va. "Tears just ran down my eyes automatically when I saw it. It's really inspiring."

The presence of Mr. Obama seemed to energize the crowd, with a loud ovation and shouts of "Four more years!" and "That's the man!" as he took the stage. But his speech drew tepid applause from some in the audience who said they felt he was too restrained.

"He has the ability to put it where the goats can get it, but instead he keeps it all in a little box," Ms. Harris said, a reference to Mr. Obama's oratory skills. She added: "We like him. We just wish he would fight harder."

Some of the loudest cheers were for the Rev. Al Sharpton, who delivered a series of memorable one-liners in a speech laced with religious references in the style of Dr. King.

Of the Republican plan to change Medicare, he said: "This is not about Obama. This is about your mama!"

A number of speakers made direct appeals to people to vote for Mr. Obama. Mr. Jackson, twice a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination in the 1980s, referred to Mr. Obama's Republican opponents as "men that seem willing to sink the ship just to destroy the captain."

Most speakers cast today's struggle as being as much about economics as race, and mentioned Dr. King's effort to organize the nation's poor shortly before his death in 1968. Several pointed to the Occupy Wall Street protests as evidence of modern-day protest and discontent.

"They changed the game on us," said Andrew Young, a friend of Dr. King's and a former mayor of Atlanta. "Now it's economics that controls the politics."

He added: "Just like we won the battle of voting rights, we can win the battle of economic rights."

Carolyn Bledsoe, 70, a retired teacher who lives in Washington and who participated in the 1963 march, praised the progress since her childhood in the Jim Crow South, where her father was a sharecropper. But racism, she said, has simply changed form -- more insidious, less direct.

"Now it's on paper," she said.

Ms. Bledsoe recalled the shame of being turned away from the first McDonald's in Goldsboro, N.C., in the 1950s because she was black, a feeling that most of her young students have not experienced. Race still binds them, she said, just in subtler ways.

The March on Washington she recalled fondly and a little wistfully. Most young people do not understand how her generation struggled, Ms. Bledsoe said. The country has come a long way, but not far enough.

"Some days I feel like we're at the beginning," she said. "Some days I feel like we're in the middle. But I never feel like we're at the end."

Lonnie Bunch, founding director of the National Museum of African American History and Culture in Washington, said he believed the monument would help.

"For so long, we either tried to ignore race, tamp it down or try to say that it's over, that we've solved all the problems," Mr. Bunch said. "His struggle helped us realize there's still a great deal of ambiguity about race. His monument will ensure we don't forget it."