The White House fought on Tuesday to contain the growing political furor over allegations of misconduct at the nation's veterans hospitals as Republicans, eager to use the issue in the midterm elections, seized on the reports as new evidence that President Obama is unable to govern effectively.

Rob Nabors, the president's deputy chief of staff, will fly to the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Phoenix on Wednesday to assess the most damning reports -- that government workers falsified data or created secret waiting lists to hide the long delays veterans faced before seeing doctors.

The president is also sending Denis R. McDonough, his chief of staff, to Capitol Hill on Wednesday to consult with the chairman of the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee, Senator Bernard Sanders, independent of Vermont. Lawmakers are working on bipartisan legislation that would give veterans officials greater authority to fire those responsible at the department. The House is expected to vote on Wednesday on a bill, and the Senate is expected to hold hearings on the legislation soon.

Inside the White House, officials said that there was no political panic but that the issue was of serious, substantive concern -- unlike, they said, a previous Republican uproar over extra scrutiny given to Tea Party groups by the Internal Revenue Service.

White House officials described Mr. Obama as eager for the results of an investigation into the allegations by the department's inspector general and a separate review of hospital practices being conducted by Mr. Nabors and Eric Shinseki, the secretary of the department. Jay Carney, the White House press secretary, declined to say when Mr. Obama might address the situation again publicly.

"He is not at all pleased with some of the allegations and will be extremely unhappy if some of them prove to be true," Mr. Carney said.

Republican lawmakers intensified their criticism of Mr. Obama, and some made it clear they intended to use the incidents at the hospitals as fodder for a broader political theme about incompetence in his administration.

"The election of President Obama ushered in a new era of big government and with it a renewed flurry of mismanagement," Representative Kevin McCarthy of California, the House Republican whip, said in a statement. "If the president truly did not know about these scandals and mistakes, we should doubt his ability to properly manage the leviathan government that he helped create."

Representative Eric Cantor of Virginia, the No. 2 Republican in the House, told reporters on Tuesday that Mr. Obama had not acted swiftly enough. He added that "it is time for our president to come forward and take responsibility for this and do the right thing by these veterans and begin to show that he actually cares about getting it straight."

The increasing reports of misconduct at numerous veterans hospitals other than Phoenix in recent weeks have prompted outrage among members of both parties demanding swift action. On Tuesday, Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, repeated a call for the F.B.I. to pursue criminal violations.

"People are fed up and impatient," Mr. Blumenthal said in an interview. "So am I."

The incidents have also generated a new round of condemnation from the president's liberal pop culture allies, an indication that anger about the allegations has moved beyond the halls of Congress. On Monday, Jon Stewart on Comedy Central mocked the president's top officials, including Mr. Shinseki, for what he called tepid expressions of outrage and anger in recent days.

Reacting to Mr. Shinseki's declaration that he was "mad as hell" about the allegations, Mr. Stewart said, "Your 'mad as hell' face looks a lot like your 'Oh, we're out of orange juice' face."

As a candidate for president, Mr. Obama denounced delays and poor care for veterans at hospitals run by the Department of Veterans Affairs and vowed that his administration would address the backlogs and greatly improve care. He pledged in a 2008 campaign speech to build "a 21st-century V.A." and to confront what he called "the broken bureaucracy of the V.A."

But more than five years into his presidency, Mr. Obama has again found himself exposed to political danger by a bureaucracy that seems beyond his immediate control.

In responding to the allegations of delays at veterans hospitals, the Obama White House has embraced what has become a familiar public relations pattern in dealing with political crises: Administration officials declare their outrage as they urge patience while an investigation is completed.

The White House has also borrowed a page from its response to the debacle of the rollout of HealthCare.gov this past fall, when Mr. Obama sent a top aide to help repair the health care website and impose management discipline. By sending Mr. Nabors to assist Mr. Shinseki in his review, the White House is installing one of its own operatives to provide a direct pipeline of information to Mr. Obama.

So far, White House officials have waved aside calls for Mr. Shinseki to resign in much the same way they rejected calls for the resignation of Kathleen Sebelius, the secretary of health and human services, over the botched health care rollout. Mr. Carney said Monday that the president still has confidence in Mr. Shinseki.

Mr. Carney said the White House was supportive of the goals of legislation probably coming up for a vote on Wednesday in the House. The bill already has more than a half-dozen Democratic co-sponsors, including outspoken liberals such as Representative Peter A. DeFazio of Oregon, and is likely to pass overwhelmingly.

But passage of that legislation is not likely to stop Mr. Obama's critics in Congress -- especially Republicans -- from seeking to use the allegations at the veterans hospitals to their political advantage ahead of this fall's elections.

On Tuesday, Representative Jeff Miller, Republican of Florida, the chairman of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs, criticized officials at the department as failing to respond adequately to a subpoena in the case. Mr. Miller said the committee had requested emails and documents from two dozen officials and had received only 200 emails from one department employee.

"I am quickly getting the impression the department does not want to fully cooperate in this matter," Mr. Miller said.

Several Democratic members said they feared that Republicans may be laying the groundwork for a push to privatize veterans' health care and dismantle one of the largest bastions of government health care in the United States.

Mr. Sanders, the Senate veterans panel chairman, said he was willing to work with Republicans to improve health care in the system, but he warned against using the allegations as a political weapon.

"I am going to do everything I can to prevent V.A. health care from being politicized," Mr. Sanders said.

He added: "We are talking about the lives of six and a half million men and women who have put their lives on the line to defend this country, who deserve to be treated with respect, not be made into a political football."
