President Obama said on Sunday that he was confident the United States and the European Union would succeed in negotiating a new trans-Atlantic trade deal by the end of the year, saying the benefits of such an agreement were "indisputable."

Mr. Obama said images of factories moving overseas and lost jobs created a narrative about trade agreements that "drives, understandably, a lot of suspicion" in places like the United States and Germany. But, he added, well-designed trade deals can have greater benefits.

"It is indisputable that it has made our economy stronger," he said. "It has made sure that our businesses are the most competitive in the world."

Mr. Obama spoke while standing next to Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany at a news conference in Hanover as they prepared to preside over the opening here of the world's largest industrial trade fair.

In the evening, Mr. Obama and Ms. Merkel hosted a dinner for 29 chief executives of major American and German companies.

The president's visit to Germany was intended to bolster negotiators seeking to wrap up a trade agreement between the United States and the European Union, an accord that Ms. Merkel supports but that is highly unpopular in her country.

Ms. Merkel is among Mr. Obama's most trusted counterparts, and the president is eager to support her during difficult political times. Ms. Merkel has struggled in recent months to confront a surge of migrants and a weakening economy.

On Sunday, she echoed Mr. Obama's enthusiasm for the trans-Atlantic trade deal, using bolder language than is her usual style.

"We should get a move on," the chancellor said. "We all know the reproaches, worries and fears, and what difficulties remain."

But if time is used wisely, she said, an agreement that will raise living standards can emerge. "So my request to those who are present," she added, looking around the audience of hundreds of business leaders and politicians, is: "Do it, and then we can have a great success this year."

The chancellor greeted the president at the Schloss Herrenhausen, the former summer residence of the Royal House of Hanover. They stood in front of a line of German troops in gray overcoats and green berets as the national anthems of the two nations played before the two leaders returned inside for a private meeting.

Mr. Obama said he hoped the trade negotiations could be completed before he left office.

"I don't anticipate that we will be able to complete ratification of a deal by the end of this year, but I do anticipate that we will have completed the agreement," he said. Once negotiations are finished, he said, "people will be able to see exactly why this will be good for our two countries."

Yet even as he expressed confidence that a deal would be reached this year, Mr. Obama acknowledged that "time is not on our side," and he offered a thinly veiled warning that a deal could be doomed if politicians like Hillary Clinton, who opposes the accord, are elected this year.

"If we don't complete negotiations this year, then upcoming political transitions in the United States and Europe could mean this agreement won't be finished for quite some time," Mr. Obama said, not mentioning Mrs. Clinton, his former secretary of state, directly.

Earlier, Mr. Obama's commerce secretary, Penny Pritzker, told an audience of 350 business leaders, "We must ask ourselves: What is the cost of delay?"

"Now is the time for U.S.-German leadership," she said.

Yet Germans often veer between admiration and scorn of the United States. Rarely was that more clear than in the contrasting ways that two groups prepared to greet Mr. Obama here this weekend.

Undeterred by the scandal caused by Volkswagen's deceit about emissions from its diesel vehicles in the United States, Germany's export-driven businesses showed off their wares in eager anticipation of the fair's opening on Sunday and the first visit to this city by a sitting American president. Mr. Obama helped open the fair.

Mr. Obama kindled good will with an unusually glowing appraisal of Ms. Merkel, telling Germany's best-selling newspaper, Bild, that he was proud to call her a friend. In particular, he praised Ms. Merkel's "real political and moral leadership" in welcoming more than a million migrants last year.

None of that impressed the tens of thousands of protesters who gathered in Hanover's Opera Square on Saturday. Their goal, as proclaimed in hundreds of banners and chants, was to topple the trade deal, the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.

Germany depends on exports for its wealth and on the United States for its security. Yet many Germans do not see the trade agreement as a good thing.

Monica Orth, 54, a therapist for teenagers who lives in Bonn, is one of many here who see the trade pact as a plot by big businesses -- often American ones -- to lower consumer standards, bypass national justice systems and undermine Europe's way of life.

"I don't want Monsanto and Bayer to determine which seeds I eat," Ms. Orth said. As two friends nodded in agreement, she added, "Democracy is a really valuable thing, and I don't want big business to take that from me."

At least a dozen other protesters who were interviewed echoed her words. All accused corporations like Monsanto -- the American biotechnology corporation reviled by some for using genetically modified seeds that it says help battle disease -- or the German pharmaceutical company Bayer of trying to force on them products they do not want.

In a way, these Germans should be a source of American pride, fierce believers in the democratic creed that the Western Allies spread after the defeat of the Nazis.

Yet popular sentiment in Germany often turns against the United States, which, though admired for its liberty and technical prowess, is also mistrusted by many for its commercial and military dominance.

"Anti-Americanism plays a certain role" in the opposition to the trade accord, said Christian Bluth, a researcher at Bertelsmann Stiftung, a German research institute that recently commissioned a poll suggesting even stronger rejection of the deal than the latest survey by ZDF, a public-service television broadcaster, which found in mid-February that at least half of Germans opposed the proposed trade agreement.

"What I personally find very difficult to understand is why Germans are so full of fears about trade and the future at a time when they have it good and unemployment is relatively low," Mr. Bluth said in an interview.

Anton Hofreiter, a leader of the Greens party who observed the protest on Saturday, said anti-American beliefs were not the guiding force of the campaign against the trade pact. Yet he noted that demonstrators were wary that Mr. Obama had come to Europe partly to make a quick trade deal.

Protesters who were asked why they so feared a pact likely to enhance Germany's trade prospects or why they distrusted American regulators, who uncovered the Volkswagen scandal when European regulators did not, insisted that they would be deceived, describing the trade talks as secretive.

As a leading commentator, Nico Fried, noted in the newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung on Saturday, "It sometimes seems easier to get the conflicting parties in Syria to agree on peace than for the friendly trans-Atlantic partners to produce a trade agreement."
